Flu- idity and thickness of the membrane, in turn, affect membrane protein trafficking. CLR has a flat asymmetric structure defined by a planar α-face and rough β-face, named according to the nomenclature of ring compounds [5]. CLR in the membrane may exist as monomer or form dimers oriented α-face to α-face, the so-called face-to-face di- mers, stabilized by Van der Waals contacts (Figure 2A) [6]. Face-to-face CLR dimers were found in X-ray crystal structures of membra ne proteins. Another ty pe of CLR dimer may be stabilized by a hydrogen bond between hydroxyl groups (Figure 2B). However, CLR hydroxyl group rather interacts via hydrog en bonding with other membrane lipids or proteins [7]. The third type of CLR dimers, trans-bilayer tail-to-tail dimer, has been hy- pothesized to exist in membranes (Figure 2C) [8]. Figure 2. Cholesterol (CLR) dimers. Th ree types of CLR dimers: ( A), face-to-face dimer; ( B), dimer stabilized by a hydrogen bo nd (yellow dashed line); ( C) tail-to-tail dimer. 3. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 3 of 18 Therefore, parts of the membrane close to CLR molecules are more rigid and thinner. Fluidity and thickness of the membrane, in turn, affect membrane protein trafﬁcking. CLR has a ﬂat asymmetric structure deﬁned by a planar -face and rough -face, named according to the nomenclature of ring compounds [ 5]. CLR in the membrane may exist as monomer or form dimers oriented -face to -face, the so-called face-to-face dimers, stabilized by Van der Waals contacts (Figure 2A) [ 6]. Face-to-face CLR dimers were found in X-ray crystal structures of membrane proteins. Another type of CLR dimer may be stabilized by a hydrogen bond between hydroxyl groups (Figure 2B). However, CLR hydroxyl group rather interacts via hydrogen bonding with other membrane lipids or proteins [ 7]. The third type of CLR dimers, trans-bilayer tail-to-tail dimer, has been hypothesized to exist in membranes (Figure 2C) [8]. Int. J. Mol. Sci. General Mechanisms of Cholesterol Action at GPCRs In principle, CLR may affect GPCRs in two ways. It may either directly bind to the receptor and thus allosterically modulate the affinity of ligands, efficacy of agonists and spontaneous activity of the receptor. Alternat ively, CLR may affect GPCRs indirectly by changing fluidity and organization of the membrane that in turn affects signalling of Figure 2. Cholesterol (CLR) dimers. Three types of CLR dimers: ( A), face-to-face dimer; ( B), dimer stabilized by a hydrogen bond (yellow dashed line); ( C) tail-to-tail dimer. 3. General Mechanisms of Cholesterol Action at GPCRs In principle, CLR may affect GPCRs in two ways. It may either directly bind to the receptor and thus allosterically modulate the afﬁnity of ligands, efﬁcacy of agonists and spontaneous activity of the receptor. Alternatively, CLR may affect GPCRs indirectly by changing ﬂuidity and organization of the membrane that in turn affects signalling of GPCRs. While in CLR-free phospholipid bilayers CXCR4 dimer- izes via TM1 to TM5-TM7 interface, in the presence of CLR CXCR4 dimerizes through the symmetric TM3-TM4 to TM3-TM4 interface intercalated by cholesterol molecules. 8. Perspectives Evidence for the role of membrane CLR in GPCRs binding, activation, signalling, and oligomerization is overwhelming. Balanced levels of membrane CLR determine the proper function of GPCRs. Moderate ﬁne-tuning of CLR levels thus represents a therapeutic op- portunity in conditions with an altered CLR level. Membrane CLR facilitates the formation of microdomains termed lipid rafts. Lipid rafts affect the speciﬁcity and efﬁcacy of GPCR signalling and represent another CLR-related target in experimental therapeutic. High-afﬁnity binding of CLR to a receptor is very common among GPCRs of class A. It was demonstrated not only to canonical sites like cholesterol consensus motif (CCM) and CLR recognition amino acid consensus’ (CRAC/CARC) but also to non-canonical ones. These ﬁndings open a way for the development of new high-afﬁnity allosteric modulators of GPCRs based on steroid scaffold of CLR. 