{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 1, 'content': ' 1                 Contro l of G protein -coupled receptor  function via membrane - interacti ng intrinsically disordered C -terminal domains             Chiara Mancinelli1,5, Dagan  C. Marx1,5, Alberto J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Gonzalez -Hernandez1,5,   Lucia Mancinelli1, George Khelashvilli2, Joshua Levitz1,3*, David Eliezer1,4*           1Department of Biochemistry   2Department of Physiology and Biophysics   3Department of Psychiatry   4Brain and Mind Research Institute   Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY  10065, USA       5 equal contribution     * to whom corresponden ce should be addressed:    Josh Levitz, Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065,  212-746-6565,  jtl2003@med.cornell.edu   David Eliezer, Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY  10065, 212 -746-6557, dae2005@med.cornell.edu     Preprint Severs:  This article was depos ited as a preprint  in bioRxiv under a CC BY -NC-ND  license     Classification:  Biological Sciences/Biophysics and Computational Biology     Keywords:  GPCR, mGluR,  -arrestin, C -terminal domain, membrane, NMR, disordered protein      . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 2, 'content': ' 2   Abstract:   G protein -coupled receptor s (GPCR s) control intracellular  signaling  cascades via agonist - dependent coupling to intracellular transducers  including h eterotrimeric  G proteins, GPCR  kinases  (GRKs) , and arrestins . In addition to their critical  interactions with the transmembrane  core of active GPCRs, all three classes of transducers  have a lso been reported to interact with  receptor C -terminal domains (CTDs).  An underexplored aspect of GPCR CTD s is their possible  role as lipid sensors given  their proximity to the membrane . CTD -membrane interactions have  the  potential to  control the accessibi lity of key regulatory  CTD residues  to downstream effectors and  transducers . Here we report that the CTDs of two closely related  family  C GPCRs , metabotropic  glutamate receptor 2 ( mGluR2 ) and mGluR3,  bind to membranes and that this interaction controls  receptor function . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 2, 'content': 'We first characterize CTD structure with NMR spectroscopy , revealing lipid  composition -dependent  modes of membrane binding . Using  molecular dynamics  simulations  and  structure -guided mutagenesis , we  identify key conserved residues and cancer -associated  mutations that control CTD -membrane binding. Finally, we  provide evidence that mGluR3  transducer coupling is controlled by CTD-membrane interactions  in live cells which can be  modulated  by disease -associated mutations or  CTD phosphorylation . This work reveals a novel  mechanism  of GPCR modulation , suggest ing that CTD -membrane binding  may be a general  regulatory mode  throughout the  broad  GPCR  superfamily .    Significance Statement:    G protein -coupled receptor s (GPCR s) allow cells to sense and respond to their  environment and constitute the largest  class of targets for approved therapeutic drugs. Temporally  precise GPCR signaling  is achieved by coupling the binding of extracellular ligands to the binding  of intr acellular signal transducers  (e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 2, 'content': 'heterotrimeric G proteins) and regulators (e.g.  -arrestins) .   The C -terminal domains  (CTDs)  of GPCRs  are targets of various post -translational modifications   and play a critical  role in transducer  and regulator recruitment. Here we report novel interactions  of the CTDs of two  GPCRs of the  metabotropic glutamate receptor family  with cellular  membranes. These interactions serve to regulate CTD accessibility and thus, mGluR  coupling  to  transducers and regulators. We propose that dynamic CTD -membrane interaction constitute s a  general mechanism for regulating GPCR function.       . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 3, 'content': ' 3 Intro duction :  G protein -coupled receptors (GPCRs)  respond to extracellular stimuli  to drive intracellular  signal transduction pathways that control a wide variety of biological functions . Consistent with  their widespread physiological roles , GPCRs  also serve as  a major  class of target s for disease  intervention1,2. All GPCR s share a conserved  architecture  including  an N -terminal extracellular  domain (ECD)  of variable size , a seven -helix transmembrane domain (TMD) and an intracellular  C-terminal domain (CTD).  Signaling  is initiated  by binding of extracellular ligands to the receptor  ECD and/or TMD , inducing conformational changes that control coupling  of receptor TMD  and  CTD to intracellular transducers , including heterotrimeric G proteins, GPCR kinases  (GRKs)  and  -arrestins  (b-arrs).   GPCR CTDs  are generally considered to be disordered, consistent with their absence  from most structur es determined by X -ray crystallography or cryo -EM. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Indeed,  well-defined  conformations , typically  limited to small segments of GPCR CTDs , have been captured at high  resolution in only a handful of  complexes that feature  CTD-G protein3-5 or CTD-arrestin6-12  interactions , while several recent studies of isolated or unbound CTDs have confirmed their  disordered nature13-16. In addition to their roles in direct interaction with transducers, the p roximity  of GPCR CTDs to the membrane may also promote  direct  interact ions with phospho lipids. Indeed,  membrane binding has been observed for the isolated CTD of the cannabinoid receptor 117, and  many GPCR CTDs are palmitoylated18, but the functional implications of CTD-membrane   interactions are unclear.  CTD-membrane interactions could influence receptor interactions and  conformation  and thereby  modulate receptor ligand binding, activation , and trafficking . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 3, 'content': ' Furthermore, such interactions could  be sensitive to lipid composition, providing one avenue by  which lipids could dynamically regulate receptor function. Along these lines, recent work has  demonstrated that reconstituted GPCR activity can be tuned  by interactions with specific lipids19- 21, and that b-arr can also directly interact with the lipid bilayer in its receptor -bound state11,22 -24.     Metab otropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are  dimeric,  family  C GPCRs that are  characterized structurally  by their large ECDs  which contain a ligand binding domain (LBD) that  sense s the neurotransmitter glutamate  and a cysteine -rich domain that connects the LBD to the  TMD  (Fig. 1A )25. Despite this unique ECD arrangement, upon glutamate binding by the LBD,  mGluRs couple to G protein s via their TMD in a manner  generally  analogous  to, yet distinct in  detail from , that of other GPCR families5,26-28. As with other GPCRs, the CTDs of mGluRs are  known to be major determinant s of their interactions with transducers and regulatory factors29-32. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 3, 'content': ' Notably, we recently found that  modest differences in CTD composition control  the ability of the  highly homologous group II mGluRs, mGluR2 and mGluR3, to recruit b-arrs33. mGl uR3 is . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 4, 'content': ' 4 efficiently  phosphorylated by GRKs and  recruits b-arrs, which initiate clathrin -mediated receptor  endocytosis , while mGluR2 largely eludes b-arrs driven internalization . This difference is encoded  in a short ~20 residue serine/threonine  (S/T)  rich region of the CTD that begins ~15 residues after  the end of TMD helix 733.  The central role of the CTD in subtype -specific  mGluR regulation raises the question of its  structural properties and whether its proximity to the membrane may shape its structure or  function. Despite r ecent cryo -EM studies which have  resolved the structures of mGluR ECDs and  TMDs in inactive and active states5,28,34 -36, structural information on group II mGluR  CTDs  is  limited to a short membrane -proximal segment of the mGluR2 CTD  (residues 821 to 830) which  was observed bound to G  protein in a recent report5. Here, we examine the structural properties  and membrane -interactions of the CTDs of mGluR2 and mGluR3. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Using a combination of  spectroscopic and computational approaches  we find that both mGluR2 and mGluR3 CTDs are  intrinsically disordered but are capable of interaction with phospholipid membranes. We show  that  both TMD -proximal  and -distal  basic residues can mediate electrostatic  interactions  with lipid  headgroups .  Addit ionally, we identify  in mGluR3 a critical aromatic residue, Y853, that can stably  embed itself in the  membrane  to potentially restrict  access to the mGluR3 CTD S/T -rich. We then  find that point  mutation s, including those associated with  melanoma, can modulate  membrane  interactions,  b-arr-dependent internalization , and G protein activation  in cells . Furthermore , we  show  that EGF stimulation leads to agonist -independent mGluR3 internalization, depending on  the presence of  Y853, suggesting that  Y853  phosphorylation  drive s receptor internalization  by  releasing the CTD from the membrane . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Together t his work reveals a complex and dynamic  interactions  between the intrinsically disordered CTD and the membrane, expanding the known  repertoire of GPCR regulatory mechanisms.       Results:     Disordered mGluR CTD s bind negatively charged  membranes in vitro   To investigate the structure of mGluR CTD s and probe potential membrane interaction s,  we turned to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy  using  purified , recombinant  CTD  construct s. For a quantitative, single -residue resolution  assay of membrane binding, we took  advantage of the  effects of the  slow tumbling rates of  large unilamellar vesicles (LUVs)  on NMR  signals.  Briefly,  IDP interact ions with vesicles attenuates  the signal s of residues that interact  with  the membrane because they adopt  the slow tumbling  rates and long rotational correlation times . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 4, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 5, 'content': ' 5 of the  LUVs (Fig. 1B ). This assay has been used ext ensively to characterize IDP/membrane  interactions37-39 but has not been applied to GPCR CTDs. We first obtained  2D 15N-1H HSQC  spectra for both mGluR2 and  mGluR 3 CTD s in the absence of lipids , which exhibited the sharp  signals and  limited dispersion that are characteristic of IDPs  (Figs. 1C,D). In the presence of  LUVs composed of DOPS ( 18:1 1,2 -dioleoyl -sn-glycero -3-phospho -L-serine) many signals in the  spectra  of both CTDs were clearly attenuated  (Figs. 1C,D insets ), indicative of an interaction  between the corresponding  CTD regions  and the negatively charged vesicles. Spectra acquired  in the presence of LUVs comprised of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC (18:1 [9-Cis] 1,2 -dioleoyl -sn-glycero -3- phosphocholine) or only DOPC exhibited variable degrees of signal loss  (Fig. S1 ) suggesting that  CTD-membrane interactions are sensitive  to lipid composition. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 5, 'content': '  We then asked whether the mGluR CTDs form helical secondary structure upon  membrane binding using circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. CD spectr a of the mGluR2 ( Fig.  S2A) and mGluR3  (Fig. S2B) CTDs showed no evidence for alpha -helix formation  either in the  absence of lipids or in the presence of vesicles  under  conditions where maximal membrane  binding was observed by NMR . Because formation of short segments of helical structure can be  difficult to detect in longer polypeptides, we also examined CD spectra of shorter mGluR2 and  mGluR3 CTD peptides corresponding more closely to just their membrane -binding regions  (see  below) . These spectra ( Figs. S2C,D ) also showed no evidence for alpha -helix formation  in the  absence or presence of membranes. Even the presence of membrane mimetic SDS and DPC  micelles, which often induce helical structure40-42, did not result in helix formation (Figs. S2E). As  a control, we confirmed using CD that LUVs induce robust helical structure in a helix -8 peptide  from NTS1 ( Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 5, 'content': 'S 2F), as previously reported43. These results are consistent with the physico - chemical characteristics  of the  membrane -binding regions of the mGluR2 and mGluR3 CTDs ,  which do not show  the amphipathic nature typical of membrane -induced helices ( see helical wheel  plots in Fig. S2 G,H). Thus, it appears  that group II mGluR CTDs  remain disordered  upon  membrane binding .    Electrostatics mediate mGluR CTD -membrane interactions   To enable sequence -specific analysis of CTD-membrane binding, we obtained NMR  backbone resonance assignments using conventional triple resonance NMR experiments  (Figs.  1; S1). Chemical shift based secondary structure assessments confirmed the highly disordered  nature of both CTDs  in the absence of LUVs , as indicated by the lack of any significant secondary  structure propensities  (Figs. S3A,B). Plots of the ratio of NMR signal intensities in the presence  versus absence of LUVs as a function of position (Figs. 2A,B ) show  that both  mGluR CTDs  . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 5, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 6, 'content': ' 6 interact with phospholipid s via their  N-terminal region s. For both CTDs, NMR signal attenuation  is dependent on negatively charged lipid content , as signal attenuation is absent (mGluR2) or  decreased (mGluR3) in the absence of DOPS  (Figs. 2A,B;  S1).  Despite similar binding profiles  at their N -termini, the membrane binding region for the mGluR3 CTD is longer , spanning the first  ~30 residues, compared with  ~21 residues for mGluR2 . Plots of the average intensity ratio as a  function of LUV composition within the N -terminal 20 residues ( Fig. 2C) illustrate both the clear  DOPS -dependence of membrane binding  in this region, in contrast with the C -terminal region  (Fig. 2D )    Inspection of the sequence of both mGluR CTDs revealed a conserved N -terminal cluster  of basic residues ( Fig. 3A), which we hypothesized could drive CTD binding to negatively charged  DOPS headgroups. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Mutagenesis of each of the four basic residues in this cluster to alanine  reduced membrane binding for the mGluR2 CTD, with the strongest effect observed for R834A   (Figs. 3B,C; S4). The effect was most pronounced for LUVs composed of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC,  indicating  that increasing negative charge content in the membrane can partly compensate for  the loss of individual basic residues in the CTD  (Fig. 3C). These result s support a major rol e for  electrostatic interactions between basic CTD residues  and anionic phospholipids in driving  CTD- membrane interactions.   To further understand the properties of the mGluR CTD -membrane interaction , we   examine d the potential role of membrane  curvature in altering the membrane -bound region of  mGluR CTD . We measured binding to DOPS vesicles with diameter s ranging from 50-400 nm   and observed no substantial changes in mGluR2 membrane binding, indicating that mGluR C TDs  are insensitive to membrane curvature ( Fig. S5). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 6, 'content': 'To assess whether different regions of the  protein are bound to the membrane with different affinities , we obtained NMR intensity ratio data  for the mGluR3 CTD as a function of lipid concentration ( Fig. S6). We find that the N -terminal  basic cluster  remains bound  even  at lower lipid concentrations but  observe  a reduction in binding  of the subsequent residues ( S845 to T860 ) comprising  the S/T -rich region of the mGluR3 CTD ,  suggesting that this region binds more weakly .    An aromatic residue anchor s the mGluR3 CTD S/T-rich region to the membrane    To further probe structural changes in the  mGluR CTD s upon binding  to membranes , we  turned to all -atom molecular dynamics simulations . We focused our analysis on the mGluR3 CTD ,  as this subtype features  more exten sive membrane  interactions than mGluR2  (Figs. 2), and since  the CTD is known to have a central role in mGluR3 regulation33. We built a system containing a  1:1 DOPC/DOPS phospholipid bilayer  and a protein chain  comprising both transmembrane helix . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 6, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 7, 'content': ' 7 7 (TM7)  of mGluR3  and the CTD  (see Methods ). We included the transmembrane tether to  increase the probability of observing  CTD-membrane interactions  within the simulation time and  to bridge the in vitro experiments with isolated CTDs to the biological context of the CTD where it  is attached  to the TMD  at its N-terminus . We started the simulations with the CTD in a  disordered   conformation with no contac ts with the membrane and 6 independent  replica s were simulated for  ~375 ns each , resulting in ~ 2.25 s of total simulation time  (Figs. S7A-F). In all replicas , we  observed interactions between the mGluR3 CTD and the membrane . We did not observe any  alpha -helix formation  and found i nstead  that the mGluR3 CTD is conformationally dynamic with  little or no  regular secondary structure  (Figs. S 7A-F, panels iii ), consistent with our CD data above   (Fig. S 2). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 7, 'content': '    Since our  NMR -based binding profile s revealed an extended membrane binding interface  for the mGluR3 CTD, we sought to identify trajectories that captured a similar membrane binding  mode . We calculated the distance of each C  in the CTD from the lipid phosphate plan e to assess   CTD-membrane interactions on a residue -by-residue basis and facilitate compar ison with our  NMR data  (Fig. S 7, panels ii ). We find that  all the trajectories exhibit proximity of the  N-terminal   basic cluster region to the membrane surface, consistent with the tight er binding observed for this  region in our NMR experiments.  Furthermore, one of the trajectories , replica 6 (Fig. S 7F, panel  ii), featured a more extended membrane binding region , enc ompassing the N -terminal ~2 8  residues,  that agrees well with the NMR data  at high lipid concentrations, suggesting that the  binding mode captured in this simulation is consistent with that observed in vitro  (Figs. 4A,B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 7, 'content': 'We  also calculated the  radius of gyration (R g) of the CTD during each trajectory to determine its  hydrodynamic size . Four of the six trajectories  (replicas 1 -4) primarily sample more compact  conformations of the CTD (Figs. S8A,B) which do not bind the membrane . The two remaining   trajector ies (replica s 5 and 6) sample  more extended conformations , with r eplica 5 exhibit ing  proximity of the  N-terminal basic cluster to the membrane, match ing our NMR data  at lower lipid  concentrations  (Fig. S8C). For both replica 5 and 6,  interactions between  basic  residues ( primarily   R838 and R843 ) and DOPS headgroups ( Figs. 4C; S8D-G) anchor the N -terminal region to the  membrane . We also found that dynamic interactions between R869 and the membrane contribute  to transient anchoring of the C-terminal portion of the CTD  to the bilayer  (Figs. 4A; S8D-G).   The extended mGluR3 -CTD binding region  observed in  replica 6  includes the S/T -rich  region (Fig. 5A) which we have shown confers -arr-mediated internalization33. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Intriguingly, Y853  within this region shows the largest buried surface area in  replica 6  (Figs. 4C; 5B,C), which   captures the extended binding mode , but is situated far from  the membrane in replica 5  (Fig.  S8C). Aromatic residues are known to partition favorably into membranes and are often found in . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 8, 'content': ' 8 interfacial regions of transmembrane domains44-46. Accordingly, Y853 was consistently found  either inserted into the membrane or at the interfacial  lipid headgroup region in replica 6 (Figs.  5B,C ). Furthermore, the membrane proximity of nearby S/T residues appears to be correlated  with that of Y853 ( Fig. S 9A), while rem aining dynamic ( Fig. S 9B). To further probe  the importance  of this aromatic residue in the membrane interactions of the S/T -rich region of the mGluR3 CTD,  we examined the effects of mutati ng Y853  to alanine  using  our NMR -based assay.  Compared to  WT, Y853A resulted in a similar binding profile to 1:1 DOPC:DOPS vesicles  for the N -terminal  basic region,  but showed decreased binding of the CTD in the S/T -rich region  (Figs. 5D; S9C,D). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 8, 'content': ' Indeed, the resulting profiles resemble those obtained at lower lipid concentrations, indicating that  Y853 plays a crucial role in stabilizing the extended binding mode  seen in replica 6  and at higher  lipid concentrations .    CTD-membrane binding  is modulat ed by cancer -associated  mutations .  The mGluR3 CTD contains a number of cancer -associated mutations, two of which ,  G848E and E870K,  are frequently observed in melanomas47. G848 lies within the S/T -rich region ,  nestled in between R 843 and Y853 , and is membrane -associated according to both the NMR  data a nd our MD simulation s (Figs. 4B; 5E,F).  E870 is in the C -terminal region of the mGluR3  CTD that is weakly membrane associated according to the NMR data  and features transient  contacts with the membrane in our simulation  that are likely mediated by its neighbor R869 (Figs.  5E,F). Based on the se results, we hypothesized that both cancer -associated mutations could alter  membrane binding due to changes in the local electrostatic properties of the mGluR3 CTD that  would either diminish (G848E) or promote  (E870K) interactions with DOPS headgroups. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 8, 'content': 'To test  this, we measured binding  of these mutants  using our NMR -based approach. The mGluR3 CTD  G848E variant resulted in reduced interaction between the S/T-rich region of the CTD and the  membrane, similar to the effect observed for the Y853A mutation ( Figs. 5G; S9C,D). Strikingly,  the E870K mutation extended the membrane -interacting region of the CTD nearly to its very C - terminus  (Figs. 5H; S9C,D). The ability of both cancer -associated mutations to alter CTD- membrane binding further supports the role of electrostatics in driving these  interactions.     mGluR3  CTD membrane interact ions modulate receptor internalization in living cells    Having  established that mGluR3 mutations can alter membrane binding in vitro , we next  asked if modifications which alter CTD -membrane interactions can also alter  receptor function  in  living cells. We initially focused on agonist -induced mGluR3 internalization , which is driven  by  phosphorylation -dependent interactions with b-arrs33. As described above, w e reasoned that . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 8, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 9, 'content': ' 9 binding of the mGluR3 S/T -rich region to the membrane surface could modulate  the ability of the  CTD to interact with GRKs  and/or b-arrs to mediate internalization.   We assessed the effects of the Y853A , G848E, and E870K mutations  (Fig. 6A) on  mGluR3 internalization using  an established live cell surface labeling imaging -based assay33. All  mutants expressed on the surface, although a small decrease relative to wild type was observed  for G848E and E870K ( Fig. S 10A). To quantify  receptor internalization , we label ed N-terminal  SNAP -tagged mGluR3 transfected into HEK  293T cells with a membrane -impermeable  fluorophore after 60 min treatment with agonist or antagonist. A consistent ~30% drop in  fluorescence was observed for wild type  mGluR3  following agonist treatment, reflecting   endocytosis  (Fig. 6B). Compared to WT , G848E and Y853A mGluR3  mutants  exhibit a greater  degree of glutamate -evoked internalization ( Fig. 6B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The data for G848E are consistent with our  previous report that this mutation results in enhanced internalization33. In contrast, the E870K  mutation drastically decreased glutamate -induced internalization of mGluR3 ( Fig. 6B). These  results are consistent with our hypothesis  that CTD-membrane interactions regulate the  accessibility of the CTD to GRKs and b-arrs, with mutations that inhibit  or enhance  CTD- membrane binding  exhibiting  enhanced  or blunted  internalization , respectively .   To further assess our interpretation that altered CTD -membrane interaction s underli e the  observed  changes in receptor internalization, we examined the effects of artificially anchoring the  mGluR3 CTD to the membrane  by appending  a CAAX box lipidation motif to its C -terminus  (Figs.  6A; S10A). Indeed, this variant exhibited a reduction in glutamate -induced receptor internal ization  similar ly to the E870K  mutant receptor  (Fig. 6B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 9, 'content': ' We also visualized receptor internalization via  live cell microscopy where we labeled plasma membrane SNAP -tagged mGluR3 variants with a  membrane -impermeable fluorophore and visualized fluorescence localization following glutamate  treatment (30 min, 1 mM) . This analysis confirmed the enhanced internalization of G848E and  Y853A and the reduced internalizati on of E870K and mGluR3 -CAAX  following either 15 or 60 min  of glutamate treatment  (Fig. 6C).   To assess any effects of CTD mutations on G protein activation, we performed patch  clamp measurements using a GIRK channel current assay (see Methods). In this assay, G848E  showed a clear left -shift and Y853A showed a small right -shift,  while E870K  and -CAAX showed  similar apparent glutamate affinities to wild type mGluR3  (Figs. 6D; S 10B,C). These observations  suggest that these mutations can exert  distinct  funct ional effects on b-arr and G protein coupling . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 9, 'content': '  Motivated by our observations of the key contribution of residue Y 853 to the membrane  interactions of the mGluR3 CTD S/T -rich region, we considered whether phosphorylation of this  residue could influence CTD -effector interactions by reducing membrane binding. Consistent with . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 10, 'content': ' 10 this hypothesis, a phosphomim etic Y853D mutant  showed enhanced internalization compared to  WT ( Fig. 6E ). We then found  that treatment of  mGluR3 -transfected HEK 293T cells with epidermal  growth factor ( EGF; 100 ng/ml ), which  stimulate s myriad downstream kinase signaling pathways,   led to detectable internalization of WT, but not of Y853A mGluR3 in the absence of agonist  (Figs.  6F,G). Combining agonist and EGF treatment enhanced internalization to a  similar  extent to that  observed for the agonist treated Y853A mutant  (Fig. 6 G). These results s uggest  that membrane - interacting residues in the mGluR3 CTD can contribute to both agonist -driven homologous  internalization and heterologous internalization following stimulation of other cellular pathways. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 10, 'content': '      Discussion:     Many transmembrane proteins contain disordered intracellular domains in the form of  either extended loops or terminal domains  that frequently serve important scaffolding roles to  control localization/trafficking and are typically regulated by phosphorylation or other post - translational modification . However, a structural understanding of such domains is often limited  as they are rarely resolved in X -ray crystallography or cryo -EM studies . The functional roles of  disordered intracellular domains  in GPCRs , particularly their CTDs, have drawn increasing  interest in recent years . Several studies have  confirmed the disordered nature of GPCR CTDs13- 16 and direct interactions of receptor CTDs with the intracellular face of the co rresponding TMDs,  which are regulated by phosphorylation and/or agonist binding and influence both receptor activity  and coupling to b-arrs, have been documented15,16,48. In addition to their scaffolding and  autoinhibitory interactions,  direct  binding of  disordered intracellular domains  to the membrane has  been shown to play functional roles49-51, but GPCRs have not been the subject of such studies  to  date. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Membrane p hospholipid composition and cholesterol levels have been shown to modulate   GPCR function20,21, but this has been thought to  occur primarily by direct interactions with   membrane -embedded TMDs . Here, we show that GPCRs can also sense the membrane in a  functionally  relevant way through their disordered intracellular CTDs . Specifically, we find that the  CTDs of family C GPCRs mGluR2 and mGluR3 interact with membranes  via electrostatic and  hydropho bic interactions and  that modulating  CTD-membrane  interactions  by de novo or cancer - associated mutations alters  receptor internalization .      CTDs of mGluR2 and mGluR3 bind to membranes without adopting secondary structure . . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 10, 'content': '; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.16.553551doi: bioRxiv preprint ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 11, 'content': ' 11 We recently reported that  mGluR3 , but not mGluR2,  couples strongly to -arrs, dependent  on the presenc e of an S/T -rich region in its CTD33. Here  we used  NMR spectroscopy  to show that  both CTDs are highly disordered in solution  and bind to unilamellar lipid vesicles via their N - terminal regions, wit h the mGluR3 membrane -binding region extending further than that of  mGluR2 to encompass the S/T -rich region.  While  many disordered protein  region s that interact  with membranes adopt amphipathic helical structure upon binding , including  the short  amphipathi c membrane -associated helix-8 of many GPCRs43, our CD data and MD simulations  demonstrate  that the mGluR2  and mGluR 3 CTDs do not form detectable helical structure upon  membrane binding . This is consistent  with recently reported cryo-EM structures  of full-length   mGluR2 and mGluR3 which do not feature a classical helix 85,52. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 11, 'content': ' Notably , our data do not rule  out the possibility of very short helical segments  in the membrane -bound CTDs , which have been  observed in other intracellular membrane -binding domains49.  Consistent with our findings for the mGluR CTDs, there are numerous  examples of IDP - membrane interaction modes that do not involve secondary structure  formation . A prominent  example  is the MARCKS -ED peptide from the effector domain of my ristoylated alanine -rich C - kinase substrate53,54, which features 13 positively charged and 5 hydrophobic residues within a  short  25-residue polypeptide segment. The C -terminal motif of worm complexin also binds to  membranes without secondary structure via a combination of positive ly charge d and hydrophobic  side chains55,56. Another particularly relevant example is the N -terminal region of the  Mycobacterium tuberculosis  divisome protein ChiZ, which binds to acidi c membranes primarily  via hydrogen bonds between phospholipid headgroups and 9 arginine residues57. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 11, 'content': '   mGluR3 -transducer  coupling is modulated by CTD-membrane interactions    We posit that CTD -membrane interactions can regulate CTD availability for interactions  with downstream effectors such as GRKs and b-arrs. We utilized two cancer -associated   mutations  and one de novo mutation in the mGluR3 CTD  to demonstrate an inverse corre lation  between  membrane binding of the mGluR3 S/T -rich region and b-arr-mediated receptor  internalization in living cells. Mutations that reduce local membrane association  (G848E and  Y853A)  result in increased receptor internalization, whereas a mutation t hat enhances and  extends membrane binding (E870K) results in increased receptor internalization. Importantly,  introduction of a membrane anchoring CAAX box motif at the C -terminus of mGluR3 also  decreases receptor internalization and further strengthens th e relationship between CTD- membrane binding  and receptor internalization.    . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 11, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 12, 'content': ' 12 Tyr phosphorylation can complement Ser/Thr phosphorylation  in GPCR CTDs   The presence of Y853 within the S/T -rich region and its importance for the membrane  interaction s of this region prompted us to consider the possibility that phosphorylation of this  tyrosine residue could also play a role in modulating CTD -membrane binding, and thereby  regulating coupling to  transducers, including  b-arrs. Notably, tyrosine residues are known to  partition favorably at membrane/water interfaces  and have been observed to anchor the  membrane interactions of other disordered intracellular domains49, and tyrosine phosphorylation  has previously been reported to disrupt  localized membrane binding of several  disordered   proteins58,59. Indeed, we found that treatment of cells expressing mGluR3 with EGF resulted in  mGluR3 internalization even in the absence  of agonist, and enhanced internalization in the  presence of agonist, dependent on the presence of Y853. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Introducing the phosphomimetic  Y853D  mutation  also enhanced agonist -stimulated  mGluR3  internalization.  Together these observations  support a potential role for Y853 phosphorylation -induced release of the mGluR3 CTD from the  membrane , increasing its  accessibility for GRK and b-arr coupling.  In light our own observations  of the role of tyrosine -membrane interactions in regulating mGluR3 internalization and previous  reports of their role in regulating T cell receptor activation49, we posit that modulation of such  interactions may constitute a general mechanism for receptor  regulation.     GPCR CTDs influence receptor function via multiple modalities .   The work presented here makes a case for a general role for GPCR CTD -membrane  interactions in regulating the accessibility of receptor  CTDs to downstream effectors, including b- arrs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Our data and simulations  are consistent with a model where  the CTD  exists  in an equilibrium  between membrane -bound  and membrane -free states which can be modulated by receptor  activation, transducer binding, post -translational modifications and changes in membrane  composition (Fig. 6H ). An appealing aspect of this model  is that it provides a mechanism for   sequential or cooperative phosphorylation60 as initial phosphorylation events could  shift the  equilibrium of phosphocode -containing  regions9,61 and increase their accessibility  for further   phosphorylation and subsequent  b-arr binding.    Together with recent results describing functionally important interactions of receptor  CTDs with the intracellular face of their TMDs15,16,48, our work expands the modalities by which  GPCR  CTDs can regulate receptor function. Several important questions emerge, perhaps the  most compelling of which is how the interplay of CTD interactions with membranes, TMDs, G - proteins, GRKs, b-arrs and other effectors is regulated and orchestrated. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 12, 'content': ' For example,  we  observe that two mGluR3 mutations , G848E and Y853A,  that exert  similar effects on CTD -. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 13, 'content': ' 13 membrane interactions and on receptor internalization exhibit opposite effects in an assay of  receptor activation, suggesting additional effects beyond membrane binding. Similarly, the G848E  and E870K  mutations  affect CTD -membrane interactions in opposite ways, yet both mutations  are found in  melanoma s, suggesting that their effects extend beyond those observed here.   Effects on G -protein recruitment via direct CTD G -protein binding3-5, autoinhibi tory CTD  interactions with G-protein binding sites on the TMD15,33,48, or allosteric effect on TMD  conformation may be responsible. Indeed, we recently  reported an auto -inhibitory effect of the  mGluR2 CTD on b-arr coupling33, supporting a potential interplay between TMD - and membrane - binding.  A recent study of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) also proposed a potential interplay  between sequestration of a short CTD segment and its interactions with G -proteins62. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 13, 'content': ' Phosphorylation likely plays a role in regulating each type of CTD interaction , but understanding  the net effects of modulating each individual interaction will require novel approaches. While our  focus here has been on the CTD, similar mechanisms and inte ractions may be operative for other  disordered intracellular GPCR domains63.  Beyond integrating the effects of multiple CTD  interactions, an additional subject for investigation is whether and how these interactions,  individually or in sum,  influence receptor conformation and activation  directly via allosteric  coupling between CTD conformations and interactions and the TMD.     Conclusions   Our results establish a  previously unappreciated yet  critical and dynamic role of CTD  membrane interactions  in controlling GPCR  desensitization  and internalization and suggest that  an equilibrium between membrane -bound and free states controls transducer coupling efficiency. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 13, 'content': '  This equilibrium may be modified in multiple  ways, including disease mutati ons, Ser/Thr  phosphorylation and possibly Tyr phosphorylation , as well as changes in membrane composition,   comprising a novel mode of CTD -mediated GPCR regulation.     . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 14, 'content': ' 14 Methods:     Protein expression and purification   Plasmids encoding the rat mGluR2 (residues 821 -872) and mGluR3 (residues 830 -879)  CTDs preceded by  an N-terminal 6x -His-SUMO tag were  procured from Twist Biosciences .   Cysteine -free versions of both mGluR2 (C859A) and mGluR3 (C866A) were generated using an  In-Fusion Cloning kit (Takara Bio) and confirmed by DNA sequencing , and were used as the  background for generating the other  mutants described . In each case, a cons erved proline located  at the end of TM728,64 was selected as the start of the CTD.   Recombinant proteins were expressed  in E. coli BL21/DE3 cells (Novagen) grown in either LB Broth  or M9 minimal media  containing  15N-labeled ammonium chloride  (1 g/L) or 15N-labeled ammonium chloride and 13C-labeled D - glucose (2 g/L)  at 37 C (275 rpm) induced with 1 mM IPTG (Isopropyl b-D-1- thiocalactopyranoside) at OD 600nm of 0.6-0.8. 4 hours post induction , cells were harvested via  centrifugation at ca. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 14, 'content': '10,500 g at 4C for 15 mins. Cell pellets (stored at -20C overnight ) were  resuspended in 50 mL lysis buffer (350mM NaCl, 20 mM Imidazole, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM  PMSF, 1 mM EDT A and 3 mM bME) and lysed either via sonication on ice for 3 rounds of 6 mins,  50% duty cycle or using an EmulsiFlex -C3 (AVESTIN , Ontario, Canada) , followed by  centrifugation at ca. 40 ,000 g for 1 hour to remove cellular debris. The supernatant  was loaded  onto a Ni-NTA column  equilibrated using 350  mM NaCl, 20 mM Imidazole, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 3  mM bME, washed with the same  buffer  and the SUMO -tagged protein was eluted using 350 mM  NaCl, 250 mM Imidazole, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 3 mM bME.  Protein -containing fractions were  pooled and cleaved overnight using SUMO protease  (added to final concentration ca. 1 M),  followed by dialysis against 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, and 1mM DTT  and loaded again  onto a  Ni-NTA column. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 14, 'content': ' The cleaved CTDs were collected in the flowthrough  and further purified  over a 5 mL HiTrapTM SP HP column on an AKTA Pure Protein Purification System (GE).  Purified  CTDs were either dialyzed into ddH 2O, flash frozen and lyophilized (mGluR2) or exchanged  into  NMR Buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na 2HPO 4 at pH 6.8) by overnight dialysis or using a PD -10  Column (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA) (mGluR3) and concentrated  as necessary  using 3K MWCO  Amicon Ultra Centrifug al filters (Millipore Sigma , Darmstadt, Germany ) at 10C . Lyophillized   mGluR2 CTD  was resolubilized to ca. 250 uM (by weight) stock concentration in NMR Buffer.     Large unilamellar vesical (LUV) preparation   18:1 1,2-dioleoyl -sn-glycero -3-phospho -L-serine (DOPS) and 18:1 [9-Cis] 1,2 -dioleoyl - sn-glycero -3-phosphocholine (DOPC) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL) . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 14, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 15, 'content': ' 15 dissolved in chloroform and stored at -20 C. Lipids were mixed to desired ratios (1 00% DOPS,  1:1 DOPS: DOPC and 100% DOPC) , residual solvent was removed under vacuum for 1 -2 hours ,  and lipids were then stored under N 2(g) at -20 C.  Lipids were resuspended to 20 mM (total lipid  concentration) in 1 mL using either NMR buffer and subjected  to 10 freeze/thaw cycles using  liquid nitrogen /warm water  baths . LUVs were then prepared using a 1 mL Avanti Mini -Extruder  (Avanti Polar Lipids ) by extruding 21 times using either a 100 nm (for NMR) or 50 nm (for CD)  pore size polycarbonate film. Smaller diameter LUVs were used for CD to limit scattering at lower  wavelengths that was apparent in data collected for the mGluR3 CTD using NMR samples  prepared with 100 nm LUVs  ( Fig. S2A ). For vesicle size titrations, LUVs were addition ally  extruded using 400 n m and 200 nm pore size polycarbonate film. LUVs were stored at 4 C and  used within 5 days. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 15, 'content': '    Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy   CTDs were prepared  in NMR Buffer as described above at concentrations ranging from  ca. 50-150 M for 5 mm NMR tubes or 300 M for 1.7 mm NMR tubes  with or without  10 mM  LUVs . Relative protein concentrations were corroborated  by 1D proton NMR  using 4,4-dimethyl - 4-silapentane -1-sulfonic acid (DSS) as an internal standard.  For l ipid titrations LUV  conc entrations included  10, 5  and 2.5 mM.  1H-15N HSQC NMR w ere collected on a Bruker  AVANCE 500 -MHz spectrometer (Weill Cornell NMR Core) equipped with a Bruker TCI cryoprobe  at 10 C with 1024 complex points in the 1H dimension and 146 complex points in the 15N  dimension using spectral width s of 18  PPM (1H) and 24 PPM  (15N). NMR spectra were processed  using NMR pipe and analyzed using NMRFAM -sparky 3.115  and NMRbox . Intensity ratios were  calculated as the ratio of int ensities in spectra  of samples  with LUVs to  those of  matched  free  protein  samples with no LUVs . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Intensi ty ratios  for cysteine -free CTDs were compared to those of  WT CTDs (Fig. S1C,F ). As no meaningful  differences were observed,  and as the cysteine  residues are located outside the membrane -binding regions of both CTDs,  the cysteine -free  versions were used in all subsequent experiments.  To assess the binding of different CTD regions  for LUVs of different compositions and size and for CTD mutants, intensity ratios were averaged  over the regions of interest .   Backbone resonance assignments were made using standard triple resonance  experiments  collected on a Bruker Avance III spectrometer at 800 Hz . Assignments were  initially  obtained for  the WT mGluR2 and mGluR3 CTDs and were transferred by inspection for most  mutants, but were augmented using HNCA spectra in select cases ( mGluR2 C859A and mGluR3 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 15, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 16, 'content': ' 16 G848E ). Secondary Ca shifts were calculated  by subtracting reference random coil Ca shifts65,66  from the observed values .    Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy   CD measurements  were performed on an AVIV 410 CD spectro polari meter. Spectra were  obtained from 300 -190 nm at 25  C after a two -minute temperature equilibration with a  wavelength step of 1 nm, an averaging time of 5 seconds, 1 scan per sample and a cell path  length of 0.02 cm (Starna , Atascadero, CA). Backgrounds were collected and subtracted from all  spectra.  Final CTD concentrations ranged from ca. 50-100 M  with protein and peptide stock  concentrations estimated  by weight , or using  A280 with a  calculated  extinction coefficient of 2980  M-1cm-1 for mGluR3 CTD , and also assessed  using 1D proton NMR with DSS as an internal  standard. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 16, 'content': '  WT mGluR 2 and mGluR 3 peptides encompassing the first 23 residues  of each CTD   (mGluR2: PQKNVVSHRAPTSRFGSAAPRAS, mGluR3: PQKNVVTHRLHLNRFSVSGTGTT)  were purchased from GenScript (Piscataway, NJ)  (>= 95% purity) . Peptides were dissolved in  NMR  buffer at  1 mg/mL and mixed 1:1 with CD buffer or LUVs in CD buffer for a final concentration  of 0.5 mg/mL. NTS1 peptide  encompassing  the first  16 residues  of its CTD  (SANFRQVFLSTLACLC ) purchased from  from GenScript  (>= 95% purity)  was dissolved in 100%  trifluoroethanol (TFE) at 15 mgs/ml as pre viously reported43 prior to dilution with NMR  buffer to  0.4 mg/mL and final 1:1 mixin g with buffer o r LUVs to a final concentration of 0.2 mg/mL  with  0.67% residual  TFE.  The dearth of aromatic residues in all of the pol ypeptides used made reliable  determination of absolute protein concentrations exceedingly difficult. Therefore, CD data are  presented in millidegrees and were not converted to mean residual molar ellipticity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 16, 'content': '     Molecular dynamics simulations    All-atom molecular dynamics simulations were performed on a n mGluR3 construct  containing both TM7 and the CTD (residues 796 -879). We used AlphaFold267 and ColabFold68 to  create models of the mGluR3 TMD and CTD  structure because no structures of mGluRs contain  a fully resolved CTD.  We chose the top ranked of five  model s (highest average AlphaFold pLDDT   score ), all of which contained a disordered CTD , and isolated the TM7 -CTD residues as our  starting structure. CHARMM -GUI69-75 was used to build a single system of our starting structure  embedded in a 1:1 DOPS -DOPC phospholipid bilayer (139 lipids per leaflet) , including 104,130  water molecules  and 0.2  M NaCl at 37C. Lysine and histidine residues were protonated to  approximate experimental pH .  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 17, 'content': ' 17 The initial simulation was equilibrated using the standard CHARMM -GUI based protocol  and scripts followed by a short, 6 -ns run using OpenMM76 and the CHARMM36m77 forcefield.  Follow ing this equilibration protocol, velocities for each atom in the system were randomized and  used to create 6 statistically independent replicates that were then simulated for 374 ns for a total  of ~2.25s of simulation time .   Analysis of  the trajectories was performed using a combination of VMD78 plug-ins and  home -made TCL and python scripts. To determine the position of side chains relative to the  phosphate plane, we adapted an approach from Marx and Fleming79 in which we compared the  z-position of a side chain  center of mass  to the average z -position of the phosphate atoms in the  bilayer leaflet closest to the CTD in each frame. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 17, 'content': 'The percent burial of side chains in the lipid  bilayer was determined by calculating the difference in solvent accessible surface area ( SASA) ,  calcul ated using VMD,  for a side chain in the absence and presence of the lipid bilayer for each  frame. This approach was used to account for SASA reductions not resulting from lipid  interactions. Side chain -lipid hydrogen bonds were calculated with the Hbonds p lug-in in VMD  using default settings  for bond angle and length . HullRad80,81 was used to calculate the radius of  gyration of each frame of the simulation. Secondary structure of each residue wa s calculated  using for each frame using homemade TCL scripts.     Patch clamp electrophysiology   Whole -cell patch clamp recordings were performed in HEK  293 cells 24 hours post - transfection as previously described82. Briefly, cells were transfected  using Lipofectamine 2000  (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  with the wildtype or mutant mGluRs together with GIRK1 -F137S83 and  soluble tdTom ato as a transfection marker in 1:1:0.2 ratio. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Recording pipettes of borosilicate and  with 3 -5 M resistance were filled with intracellular solution (in mM): 140 KCl, 10 HEPES, 5 EGTA,  3 MgCl2, 3 Na 2ATP, 0.2 Na 2GTP. Cells  were  clamped at -60 mV in a high -potassium bath solution  containing (in mM): 120 KCl, 25 NaCl, 10 HEPES, 2 CaCl 2, 1 MgCl 2. Glutamate evoked potassium  currents were recorded with an Axopatch 200B and Digidata 1550B (Molecular Devices) using  Clampex (pCLAMP) acquisition so ftware. Peak currents for the different glutamate concentrations  were measured using Clampfit (pCLAMP) and normalized to the maximum current observed at  saturating 1 mM glutamate.     Cell imaging and surface labelling assay    To image and quantify the intern alization of receptors after glutamate exposure we used   N-terminally  SNAP -tagged mGluR3 receptors33. HEK 293T  Cells were transfec ted with the . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 17, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 18, 'content': ' 18 wildtype or mutant  SNAP -mGluR3s. 24 hrs post-transfection cells were  prepared for experiments  by labeling tem with  1 M BG -Surface Alexa 546 (non -permeable dye, New England BioLabs) for  30 min at 37C in a media  containing  (in mM) : 10 HEPES, 135 NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 2 CaCl 2, 1 MgCl 2,  pH 7.4. After this, cells were washed twice and incubated with glutamate (1 mM ) for 30 min. Cells  were then imaged under an Olympus IX83 inverted microscope using a 100X 1.49 NA objective  and an Orca -Flash 4.0 CMOS camera (Hamamatsu). Representative images were selected over  a minimum of 10 images per condition.   For quantifying internalization after glutamate of the wildtype and mutant receptors we  used a previously reported  surface labelling assay33. Briefly, c ells expressing different SNAP - tagged mGluR3 constructs were exposed to 1 mM glutamate, or 20 M of the antagon ist  LY341495 (Tocris) for normalization, for 1 hr  at 37C . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Following drug incubation, cells were  labelled with 1 M BG -Surface Alexa 546 for 20 min  at room temperature  and imaged immediately   using a 60 x 1.49 NA objective. Images were analyzed  using Image J  (Fiji). Mean intensity of  thresholded fluorescent areas was calculated  using a macro based in the Li algorithm.  Background of the tresholded images was subtracted and the resultant values were  normalized  to the antagonist incubated condition , inverted to show amount of internalization (instead of  fluorescence drop) and converted to percentage of internalization. These values were averaged  per day. Each point of the bar plots represents a day of  experiment s. For EGF -stimulated   internalization we followed the same approach but applying 100 ng/mL of EGF alone or together  with 1 mM Glu. Quantification was performed  using the same Li algorithm macro and comparisons  were made  within each condition (EG F or Glu+EGF) for WT vs Y853A mutant. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 18, 'content': '    Data Sharing Plan:   All NMR chemical shift  assignment s (deposition in progress)  can be obtained online from   the biological magnetic resonance database (BMRB).  NMR i ntensity and intensity ratio data , CD  data,  and all code used for the analysis of MD simulations (deposition in progress) can be  obtained online at  GitHub.  Imaging data will be made available upon request, as well all plasmids  and reagents used in the study.     Acknowledgments and funding sources :   This work was funded in part by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R35GM136686   (DE),  R01NS129904 (JL),  F32GM148001  (DM),  F31AG077836  (CM)  and the Margarita Salas  Fellowship from the Ministry of Universities of Spain (A.G. -H), the Rohr Family Resear ch Scholar  Award (J L), and the Monique Weill -Caulier Award (J L). G.K. gratefully acknowledges support from . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 18, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 19, 'content': ' 19 the 1923 Fund.  We acknowledge assistance from Clay Bracken and Emily Grasso with NMR data  collection and processing , Jihye  Kim for guidance on EGF stimulation studies  and Derek Shore  for assistance setting up simulations . The authors gratefully acknowledge the use of in -house  computational resources of the David A. Cofrin Center for Biomedical Information in the Institute  for Computational Biomedicine at Weill Cornell Medical College .    References:     1 Wacker, D., Stevens, R. C. & Roth, B. L. How Ligands Illuminate GPCR Molecular  Pharmacology. Cell 170, 414 -427, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.009 (2017).   2 Sriram, K. & Insel, P. A. G Protein -Coupled Receptors as Targets for Approved Drugs:  How Many Targets a nd How Many Drugs? Mol Pharmacol  93, 251 -258,  doi:10.1124/mol.117.111062 (2018).   3 Maeda, S., Qu, Q., Robertson, M. J., Skiniotis, G. & Kobilka, B. K. Structures of the M1  and M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor/G -protein complexes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Science  364, 552 -557,  doi:10.1126/science.aaw5188 (2019).   4 Tsai, C. J.  et al.  Cryo -EM structure of the rhodopsin -Galphai -betagamma complex reveals  binding of the rhodopsin C -terminal tail to the gbeta subunit. Elife  8,  doi:10.7554/eLife.46041 (2019).   5 Seven, A. B.  et al.  G-protein activation by a metabotropic glutamate receptor. Nature   595, 450 -454, doi:10.1038/s41586 -021-03680 -3 (2021).   6 Kisselev, O. G., McDowell, J. H. & Hargrave, P. A. The arrestin -bound conformation and  dynamics of the phosphorylated carboxy -terminal regi on of rhodopsin. FEBS Lett  564,  307-311, doi:10.1016/S0014 -5793(04)00226 -1 (2004).   7 Shukla, A. K.  et al.  Structure of active beta -arrestin -1 bound to a G -protein -coupled  receptor phosphopeptide. Nature  497, 137 -141, doi:10.1038/nature12120 (2013).   8 Min, K. et al.  Crystal Structure of beta -Arrestin 2 in Complex with CXCR7  Phosphopeptide. Structure  28, 1014 -1023 e1014, doi:10.1016/j.str.2020.06.002 (2020).   9 Zhou, X. E.  et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 19, 'content': ' Identification of Phosphorylation Codes for Arrestin Recruitment by G  Protein -Coupled Receptors. Cell 170, 457 -469 e413, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.002  (2017).   10 Yin, W.  et al.  A complex structure of arrestin -2 bound to a G protein -coupled receptor.  Cell Res  29, 971 -983, doi:10.1038/s41422 -019-0256 -2 (2019).   11 Staus, D. P.  et al.  Structure of the M2 muscarinic receptor -beta -arrestin complex in a  lipid nanodisc. Nature  579, 297 -302, doi:10.1038/s41586 -020-1954 -0 (2020).   12 Huang, W.  et al.  Structure of the neurotensin receptor 1 in complex with beta -arrestin 1.  Nature  579, 303 -308, doi:10.1038/s41586 -020-1953 -1 (2020).   13 Guillien, M.  et al.  Structural Insights into the Intrinsically Disordered GPCR C -Terminal  Region, Major Actor in Arresti n-GPCR Interaction. Biomolecules  12,  doi:10.3390/biom12050617 (2022).  . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 19, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 20, 'content': ' 20 14 Guillien, M.  et al.  Phosphorylation motif dictates GPCR C -terminal domain conformation  and arrestin interaction. bioRxiv , 2023.2002.2023.529712,  doi:10.1101/2023.02.23.529712 (2023).   15 Heng, J.  et al.  Function and dynamics of the intrinsically disordered carboxyl terminus of  beta2 adrenergic receptor. Nat Commun  14, 2005, doi:10.1038/s41467 -023-37233 -1  (2023).   16 Shiraishi, Y.  et al.  Phosphorylation -induced conformation of beta(2) -adrenoceptor  related to arrestin recruitment revealed by NMR. Nat Commun  9, 194,  doi:10.1038/s41467 -017-02632 -8 (2018).   17 Ahn, K. H.  et al.  Structural analysis of the human cannabinoid receptor one carboxyl - terminus identifies two amphipathic helices. Biopol ymers  91, 565 -573,  doi:10.1002/bip.21179 (2009).   18 Patwardhan, A., Cheng, N. & Trejo, J. Post -Translational Modifications of G Protein - Coupled Receptors Control Cellular Signaling Dynamics in Space and Time. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Pharmacol  Rev 73, 120 -151, doi:10.1124/pharmrev .120.000082 (2021).   19 Song, W., Yen, H. Y., Robinson, C. V. & Sansom, M. S. P. State -dependent Lipid  Interactions with the A2a Receptor Revealed by MD Simulations Using In Vivo -Mimetic  Membranes. Structure  27, 392 -403 e393, doi:10.1016/j.str.2018.10.024 ( 2019).   20 Dawaliby, R.  et al.  Allosteric regulation of G protein -coupled receptor activity by  phospholipids. Nat Chem Biol  12, 35-39, doi:10.1038/nchembio.1960 (2016).   21 Yen, H. Y.  et al.  PtdIns(4,5)P2 stabilizes active states of GPCRs and enhances select ivity  of G-protein coupling. Nature  559, 423 -427, doi:10.1038/s41586 -018-0325 -6 (2018).   22 Janetzko, J.  et al.  Membrane phosphoinositides regulate GPCR -beta -arrestin complex  assembly and dynamics. Cell 185, 4560 -4573 e4519, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2022.10.018  (2022).   23 Grimes, J.  et al.  Single -molecule analysis of receptor --arrestin interactions in living  cells. bioRxiv , 2022.2011.2015.516577, doi:10.1101/2022.11.15.516577 (2022). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 20, 'content': '  24 Chen, Q.  et al.  ACKR3 -arrestin2/3 complexes reveal molecular consequences of GRK - dependent barcoding. bioRxiv , doi:10.1101/2023.07.18.549504 (2023).   25 Ellaithy, A., Gonzalez -Maeso, J., Logothetis, D. A. & Levitz, J. Structural and Biophysical  Mechanisms of Class C G Pro tein-Coupled Receptor Function. Trends Biochem Sci  45,  1049 -1064, doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.07.008 (2020).   26 Dore, A. S.  et al.  Structure of class C GPCR metabotropic glutamate receptor 5  transmembrane domain. Nature  511, 557 -562, doi:10.1038/nature13396 (2 014).   27 Wu, H.  et al.  Structure of a class C GPCR metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 bound to an  allosteric modulator. Science  344, 58-64, doi:10.1126/science.1249489 (2014).   28 Du, J.  et al.  Structures of human mGlu2 and mGlu7 homo - and heterodimers. Natu re  594, 589 -593, doi:10.1038/s41586 -021-03641 -w (2021).   29 Enz, R. Structure of metabotropic glutamate receptor C -terminal domains in contact  with interacting proteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Front Mol Neurosci  5, 52, doi:10.3389/fnmol.2012.00052  (2012).   30 Reiner, A. & Levitz, J. Glutamatergic Signaling in the Central Nervous System: Ionotropic  and Metabotropic Receptors in Concert. Neuron  98, 1080 -1098,  doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2018.05.018 (2018).  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 21, 'content': ' 21 31 Pin, J. P. & Bettler, B. Organization and functions of mGlu and GABA(B) receptor  complexes. Nature  540, 60-68, doi:10.1038/nature20566 (2016).   32 Suh, Y. H., Chang, K. & Roche, K. W. Metabotropic glutamate receptor trafficking. Mol  Cell Neurosci  91, 10-24, doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2018.03.014 (2018).   33 Abreu, N., Acosta -Ruiz, A., Xiang, G. & Levitz, J. Mechanisms of differential  desensitization of metabotropic glutamate receptors. Cell Rep  35, 109050,  doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109050 (2021).   34 Lin, S.  et al.  Structures of G(i) -bound metabotropic glutamate receptors mGlu2 and  mGlu4. Nature  594, 583 -588, doi:10.1038/s41586 -021-03495 -2 (2021).   35 Koehl, A.  et al.  Structural insights into the activation of metabotropic glutamate  receptors. Nature  566, 79-84, doi:10.1038/s41586 -019-0881 -4 (2019).   36 Nasrallah, C.  et al.  Agonists and allosteric modulators promote signaling from different  metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 conformations. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Cell Rep  36, 109648,  doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109648 (2021).   37 Das, T. & Eliezer, D. Membrane interactions of intrinsically disordered p roteins: The  example of alpha -synuclein. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom  1867 , 879 -889,  doi:10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.05.001 (2019).   38 Das, T. & Eliezer, D. Probing Structural Changes in Alpha -Synuclein by Nuclear Magnetic  Resonance Spectroscopy. Method s Mol Biol  1948 , 157 -181, doi:10.1007/978 -1-4939 - 9124 -2_13 (2019).   39 Snead, D. & Eliezer, D. Spectroscopic Characterization of Structure -Function  Relationships in the Intrinsically Disordered Protein Complexin. Methods Enzymol  611,  227-286, doi:10.1016/bs .mie.2018.08.005 (2018).   40 Parker, W. & Song, P. S. Protein structures in SDS micelle -protein complexes. Biophys J   61, 1435 -1439, doi:10.1016/S0006 -3495(92)81949 -5 (1992).   41 Bussell, R., Jr. & Eliezer, D. A structural and functional role for 11 -mer repeats in alpha - synuclein and other exchangeable lipid binding proteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 21, 'content': 'J Mol Biol  329, 763 -778 (2003).   42 Snead, D.  et al.  Unique Structural Features of Membrane -Bound C -Terminal  Domain  Motifs Modulate Complexin Inhibitory Function. Front Mol Neurosci  10, 154,  doi:10.3389/fnmol.2017.00154 (2017).   43 Dijkman, P. M.  et al.  Conformational dynamics of a G protein -coupled receptor helix 8 in  lipid membranes. Sci Adv  6, eaav8207, doi:10 .1126/sciadv.aav8207 (2020).   44 McDonald, S. K. & Fleming, K. G. Aromatic Side Chain Water -to-Lipid Transfer Free  Energies Show a Depth Dependence across the Membrane Normal. J Am Chem Soc  138,  7946 -7950, doi:10.1021/jacs.6b03460 (2016).   45 Moon, C. P. & F leming, K. G. Side -chain hydrophobicity scale derived from  transmembrane protein folding into lipid bilayers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  108, 10174 - 10177, doi:10.1073/pnas.1103979108 (2011).   46 Killian, J. A. & von Heijne, G. How proteins adapt to a membrane -water interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Trends  Biochem Sci  25, 429 -434, doi:10.1016/s0968 -0004(00)01626 -1 (2000).   47 Prickett, T. D.  et al.  Exon capture analysis of G protein -coupled receptors identifies  activating mutations in GRM3 in melanoma. Nat Genet  43, 1119 -1126,  doi:10. 1038/ng.950 (2011).  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 22, 'content': ' 22 48 Asher, W. B.  et al.  GPCR -mediated beta -arrestin activation deconvoluted with single - molecule precision. Cell 185, 1661 -1675 e1616, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2022.03.042 (2022).   49 Xu, C.  et al.  Regulation of T cell receptor activation by dynamic membrane binding of the  CD3epsilon cytoplasmic tyrosine -based motif. Cell 135, 702 -713,  doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.044 (2008).   50 Wang, Y.  et al.  Regulation of EGFR nanocluster formation by ionic protein -lipid  interaction. Cell Res  24, 959 -976, doi:10.1038/cr.2014.89 (2014).   51 Cornish, J., Chamberlain, S. G., Owen, D. & Mott, H. R. Intrinsically disordered proteins  and membranes: a marriage of convenience for cell signalling? Biochem Soc Trans  48,  2669 -2689, doi:10.1042/BST20200467 (2020).   52 Fang, W.  et al.  Structural basis of the activation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 3.  Cell Res  32, 695 -698, doi:10.1038/s41422 -022-00623 -z (2022).   53 Morton, L. A.  et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 22, 'content': ' MARCKS -ED peptide as a curvature and lipid  sensor. ACS Chem Biol  8,  218-225, doi:10.1021/cb300429e (2013).   54 Wang, J.  et al.  Lateral sequestration of phosphatidylinositol 4,5 -bisphosphate by the  basic effector domain of myristoylated alanine -rich C kinase substrate is due to  nonspecific electrost atic interactions. J Biol Chem  277, 34401 -34412,  doi:10.1074/jbc.M203954200 (2002).   55 Snead, D., Wragg, R. T., Dittman, J. S. & Eliezer, D. Membrane curvature sensing by the  C-terminal domain of complexin. Nat Commun  5, 4955, doi:10.1038/ncomms5955  (2014) .  56 Wragg, R. T.  et al.  Evolutionary Divergence of the C -terminal Domain of Complexin  Accounts for Functional Disparities between Vertebrate and Invertebrate Complexins.  Front Mol Neurosci  10, 146, doi:10.3389/fnmol.2017.00146 (2017).   57 Hicks, A., Escoba r, C. A., Cross, T. A. & Zhou, H. X. Fuzzy Association of an Intrinsically  Disordered Protein with Acidic Membranes. JACS Au  1, 66-78,  doi:10.1021/jacsau.0c00039 (2021).   58 Dikiy, I.  et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 22, 'content': ' Semisynthetic and in Vitro Phosphorylation of Alpha -Synuclein at Y 39  Promotes Functional Partly Helical Membrane -Bound States Resembling Those Induced  by PD Mutations. ACS Chem Biol  11, 2428 -2437, doi:10.1021/acschembio.6b00539  (2016).   59 Acosta, D. M., Mancinelli, C., Bracken, C. & Eliezer, D. Post -translational modific ations  within tau paired helical filament nucleating motifs perturb microtubule interactions  and oligomer formation. J Biol Chem  298, 101442, doi:10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101442  (2022).   60 Tobin, A. B. G -protein -coupled receptor phosphorylation: where, when and by whom. Br  J Pharmacol  153 Suppl 1 , S167 -176, doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0707662 (2008).   61 Nobles, K. N.  et al.  Distinct phosphorylation sites on the beta(2) -adrenergic receptor  establish a  barcode that encodes differential functions of beta -arrestin. Sci Signal  4,  ra51, doi:10.1126/scisignal.2001707 (2011).   62 Gao, Y.  et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 22, 'content': ' Asymmetric activation of the calcium -sensing receptor homodimer. Nature   595, 455 -459, doi:10.1038/s41586 -021-03691 -0 (2021).  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 23, 'content': ' 23 63 Pluhackova, K., Wilhelm, F. M. & Muller, D. J. Lipids and Phosphorylation Conjointly  Modulate Complex Formation of beta(2) -Adrenergic Receptor and beta -arrestin2. Front  Cell Dev Biol  9, 807913, doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.807913 (2021).   64 Wang, X.  et al. Structural insights into dimerization and activation of the mGlu2 -mGlu3  and mGlu2 -mGlu4 heterodimers. Cell Res , doi:10.1038/s41422 -023-00830 -2 (2023).   65 Kjaergaard, M. & Poulsen, F. M. Sequence correction of random coil chemical shifts:  correlation between neighbor correction factors and changes in the Ramachandran  distribution. J Biomol NMR  50, 157 -165, doi:10.1007/s10858 -011-9508 -2 (2011).   66 Kjaergaard, M., Brander, S. & Poulsen, F. M. Random coil chemical shift for intrinsically  disordered protei ns: effects of temperature and pH. J Biomol NMR  49, 139 -149,  doi:10.1007/s10858 -011-9472 -x (2011).   67 Jumper, J.  et al.  Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Nature   596, 583 -589, doi:10.1038/s41586 -021-03819 -2 (2021).   68 Mirdita, M.  et al.  ColabFold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nat Methods  19,  679-682, doi:10.1038/s41592 -022-01488 -1 (2022).   69 Jo, S., Kim, T., Iyer, V. G. & Im, W. CHARMM -GUI: a web -based graphical user interface  for CHARMM. J Comput Chem  29, 1859 -1865, doi:10.1002/jcc.20945 (2008).   70 Brooks, B. R.  et al.  CHARMM: the biomolecular simulation program. J Comput Chem  30,  1545 -1614, doi:10.1002/jcc.21287 (2009).   71 Lee, J.  et al.  CHARMM -GUI Input Generator for NAMD, GROMACS, AMBER, OpenMM,  and CHAR MM/OpenMM Simulations Using the CHARMM36 Additive Force Field. J Chem  Theory Comput  12, 405 -413, doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00935 (2016).   72 Wu, E. L.  et al.  CHARMM -GUI Membrane Builder toward realistic biological membrane  simulations. J Comput Chem  35, 1997 -2004, doi:10.1002/jcc.23702 (2014).   73 Jo, S., Lim, J. B., Klauda, J. B. & Im, W. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 23, 'content': 'CHARMM -GUI Membrane Builder for mixed  bilayers and its application to ye ast membranes. Biophys J  97, 50-58,  doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2009.04.013 (2009).   74 Jo, S., Kim, T. & Im, W. Automated builder and database of protein/membrane  complexes for molecular dynamics simulations. PLoS One  2, e880,  doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000880 (2007) .  75 Lee, J.  et al.  CHARMM -GUI Membrane Builder for Complex Biological Membrane  Simulations with Glycolipids and Lipoglycans. J Chem Theory Comput  15, 775 -786,  doi:10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01066 (2019).   76 Eastman, P.  et al.  OpenMM 7: Rapid development of high p erformance algorithms for  molecular dynamics. PLoS Comput Biol  13, e1005659, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005659  (2017).   77 Huang, J.  et al.  CHARMM36m: an improved force field for folded and intrinsically  disordered proteins. Nat Methods  14, 71-73, doi:10.103 8/nmeth.4067 (2017).   78 Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. & Schulten, K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph   14, 33-38, 27 -38, doi:10.1016/0263 -7855(96)00018 -5 (1996).   79 Marx, D. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 23, 'content': 'C. & Fleming, K. G. Local Bilayer Hydrophobicity Modulates Membrane Protein  Stability. J Am Chem Soc  143, 764 -772, doi:10.1021/jacs.0c09412 (2021).  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 24, 'content': ' 24 80 Fleming, P. J. & Fleming, K. G. HullRad: Fast Calculations of Folded and Disordered  Protein and Nucleic Acid Hydrodynamic Properties. Biophys J  114, 856 -869,  doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2018.01 .002 (2018).   81 Fleming, P. J., Correia, J. J. & Fleming, K. G. Revisiting macromolecular hydration with  HullRadSAS. Eur Biophys J , doi:10.1007/s00249 -022-01627 -8 (2023).   82 Gutzeit, V. A.  et al.  A fine -tuned azobenzene for enhanced photopharmacology in vi vo.  Cell Chem Biol  28, 1648 -1663 e1616, doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2021.02.020 (2021).   83 Vivaudou, M.  et al.  Probing the G -protein regulation of GIRK1 and GIRK4, the two  subunits of the KACh channel, using functional homomeric mutants. J Biol Chem  272,  31553 -31560, doi:10.1074/jbc.272.50.31553 (1997).       . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 24, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': ' 25 Figure Legends :    Figure 1:  An NMR -based assay reveals phospholipid membrane binding of  the intrinsically  disordered m GluR2 and mGluR3  CTDs.  (A) Schematic  of the structural organization of mGluR domains  highlighting  the location of the CTD compared to the ordered parts  of the protein and the membrane. (B)  Schematic of NMR -based CTD -membrane binding assay that  takes advantage of changes in tumbling rates  of the CTD due to interactions with LUVs . (C) 1H-15N HSQC spectra of isolated mGluR2* and (D) mGluR3*  CTD in the presence (red) and absence (black) of 10 mM 100  nm diameter LUVs comprised of DOPS at  pH 6.8 at 10 C, with zoomed insets of crowded regions, high lighting loss of signal of specific residues in  the presence of LUVs.     Figure 2: N -terminal regions of mGluR2 and 3 CTDs interact with negatively charged lipids.  NMR   intensity ratio s for (A) mGluR2 and (B) mGluR3  from spectra collected with and without LUVs of three  different lipid compositions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': 'Prolines, which do not give rise to signals in 1H-15N HSQC spectra, are denoted  by *, overlapping peaks for which values were not included  by ** , and residues not detected  in the spectra   by *** . (C) Averaged intensity ratios over the first ~20  residues (mGluR2 Q822 -A842; mGluR3 Q831 -T851)  illustrate the lipid composition dependence of the interactions in this region ( s.e.m .). (D) Averaged intensi ty  ratios over the last  ~20 residues (mGluR2 Q853 -L872; mGluR3 Y861 -L879) illustrate the lack of lipid  composition dependence of the interactions in this region ( s.e.m. ).    Figure 3: An N -terminal cluster of basic residues is critical for CTD membrane bind ing. (A) sequence   alignment of the first 15 residues of the mGluR2 and mGluR 3 CTDs  highlight ing conserved ( *) and positively  charged ( highlighted ) residues . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': '(B) Intensity ratio plots of mGluR2 CTD constructs containing alanine  substitutions for each of the four basic residues  from spectra collected with and without  LUVs containing a  1:1 mixture of DOPS:DOPC lipids.  (C) Averaged intensity ratios over the first ~20  residues (Q822 -A842)   illustrate the regional effect of each mutation for LUVs of different l ipid composition ( s.e.m. ). (D) Averaged  intensity ratios over the last  ~20 residues (Q853 -L872) illustrate the regional effect of each mutation for  LUVs of different lipid composition ( s.e.m. ).    Figure 4: Molecular dynamics simulations reveal multi -modal membrane interactions of the  intrinsically disordered mGluR3 -CTD. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': ' (A) Snapshots of mGluR3 TM7-CTD replica 6 trajectory ,  highlighting three conformations of the CTD: the beginning of the simulation with  no membrane contacts  (t=0, left), a highly  extended membrane -binding mode ( t=174.4 ns, middle ), and a partially extended  binding  (t=224 ns, right) (B) Comparison of the intensity ratio s for the  mGluR3 CTD in the presence of 1:1  DOPS:DOPC LUVs  (blue, right axis) with the average distance of each residue from the lipid phosphate  plane over the course of the simulation (black, left axis). (C) Interac tions between CTD residue side chains  and lipids: Left, black  total number of hydrogen bonds between each side chain  and lipid  headgroups ;  Right, red  average percent buried surface area of each side chain in the membrane.     Figure 5: Membrane interactions of the S/T -rich region of the mGluR3 CTD is modulated by mutation  of a key residue and by cancer mutations.  (A) mGluR3 -CTD sequence annotated with the NMR - and  MD-determined membrane binding region and  the overlapping Ser/Thr -rich region (* de notes residues   conserved in mGluR2 ).  (B) Snapshots of residue Y853 (shown as slate blue spheres) in membrane - embedded and membrane -associated positions (from MD replica 6) . Lipid phosphates are shown as  transparent orange spheres and lipid chains in contact with Y853 are shown  in stick representation  (DOPS  in magenta and DOPC in salmon). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': 'Remaining lipids are shown in transparent gray and the protein  backbone is shown in gray in cartoon  representation . (C) Percent buried surface area of Y853 in the lip id  bilayer plotted as a function of time in MD replica 6. (D) Comparison of the averaged integrated NMR  intensity ratio s of WT mGluR3 -CTD (dotted blue) with Y853A mGluR3 -CTD taken over the S/T-rich region   (S845-T860) as a function of LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ; Wilcoxon test; *p<0.05, ***p<0.001,  n.s.  p0.05) . (E) Snapshots of residues R843 (blue), G848 (orange) and E870 (red) at different time points  during  the time course of MD replica 6  showing  prolonged  membrane -association  of R843 and G848 and   fluctuating membrane -association of  E870  (side chains shown as spheres colored as in (F) below;  otherwise rendered and colored as above in (B)). (F) Position of side chains R843, G848, and E870 relative  to the phosphate plane of the membrane  (see methods) throughout the time course of MD replica 6.  (G) . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 25, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': ' 26 Comparison of the  averaged  NMR intensity ratio s of WT mGluR3 -CTD (dotted blue) with melanoma - associated mutations G848E mGluR3 -CTD (orange)  taken over the S/T-rich region  (S845-T860) as a  funct ion of LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ; Wilcoxon test; **p<0.01, ***p<0.001) . (H) and E870K mGluR3 - CTD (red) taken  over the last 19 residues ( Y861-L879) as a function of  LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ;  Wilcoxon test; ***p<0.001) .     Figure 6: CTD mutations that alter membrane binding affect  mGluR3  internalization and  function .   (A) Schematics of  mGluR3 CTD mutational positions and their effects on mGluR3 -CTD free vs. membrane  bound equilibrium. Larger arrows show the direction in which each  variant  perturbs the equilibrium . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': '(B)  Quantification of the extent of receptor internalization for each mGluR3  variant (with dotted line denoting  mGluR3 WT internalization) (averaged internalization per day, 10 -12 images per condition/day and 4 -9  days per condition; One -Way ANOVA with multiple comparisons, * p<0.05 *** p<0.001) . (C) Representative  images of HEK  293T cells expressing SNAP -tagged mGluR3 variant s incubated for 30 min with 1 mM Glu  (red arrows represent internalized receptors ; scale bar: 5 m ). (D) Glutamate dose response curves for  mGluR3 variants  in a patch -clamp experiment using GIRK currents as a reporter for mGluR3 G -protein  activation  (EC50: WT = 136.9  26.9 nM, G848E = 44.2  8.6 nM, Y853A = 417.8  64.8 nM,  E870K =  101.6  21.7 nM,  CAAX = 156.9  42.8 nM; F -test of EC50 shifts; **p<0.01, ***p<0.001) . (E) Quantification  of the extent of  recepor  internalization of WT mGluR3 vs. Y853 D phospho -mimetic muta nt (averaged  internalization of 10 images per condition/day across 3 days; t-test; *p<0.05 . (F) Representative images of  HEK293T cells expressing SNAP -tagged mGluR3 WT vs Y853A treated with 100 ng/ml EGF for 30 min  (red arrows represent internalization ; scale bar: 5 m ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': '(G) Quantification of the extent of  internalization for  mGluR3 WT vs Y853A mutant in EGF or Glu+EGF incubated conditions (averaged internalization per day,  10 images condition/day and 3 -4 days per condition ; t-test, **p<0.0 1 , n.s. p0.05 ). (H) Working model of  mGluR 3-CTD free vs. membrane bound equilibrium and changes that favor the  less accessible  membrane - bound (E870K, anionic lipids) or the more accessible free (Y853A, G848E, phosphorylation) state.     Figure S1: NMR spectra of mGluR2 and mGluR3  with LUVs of different compositions and of WT and  cysteine -free variants.  1H-15N HSQC spectra of mGluR2 (A,B)  and mGluR3 (D,E)  CTDs in the presence  (purple  or light blue ) and absence (black) of LUVs comprised of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC  (A,D) or DOPC (B,E)  with zoomed insets of crowded regions highlighting loss of signal of specific residues in the presence of  LUVs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': '1H-15N HSQC spectra of (C) mGluR2  WT (dark blue) and WT* (C 859A muta nt, red) CTD and (F)  mGluR3 WT (dark blue)  and WT* (C866A mutant, red) CTD.  Chemical shift changes are confined to  residues in the immediate vicinity of the mutations.     Figure S2:  Secondary structure analysis of mGluR CTDs  using CD . Circular dichroism spectra of the  mGluR2  (A) and mGluR3 (B) CTD and mGluR2 (C) and mGluR3 (D) peptides encompassing the NMR  determined binding region (first 23 residues) in the  absence of LUVs (black) or in the  presence of 10 mM ,  100 nm diameter (A) or 50 nm diameter  (B-D) DOPC ( blue), 1:1 DOPS:DOPC  (purple ) or DOPS (red)  LUVs  under conditions where NMR indicates no (DOPC) or complete ( DOPS or 1:1 DOPS:DOPC) CTD binding.    Note that for (A) the sudden increase in signal below 205 nm results from increased scattering due to  the  use of 100 nm diameter LUVs in these samples. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': ' For (D) the spectra suggest a degree of  -strand  formation, possibly due to intermolecular interactions caused by the lim ited solubility of this  peptide  (E) CD spectra of mGluR3 peptides encompassing the NMR determined binding region (first 23  residues) in the  absence (black) or  presence of 40 mM SDS  (red)  or 71 mM DPC  (blue) . (F) CD spectra of  NTSR1 peptide free  in solution  (black)  and in the presence of 10 mM 50 nm diameter D OPS LUVs  (red) .  (G,H) Helical wheel representations of the first 20 residues of the mGluR2 (G) and mGluR3 (H) CTD  illustrating the lack of clear amphipathic character  (basic residue in blue,  polar residues in yellow, apolar  residues in white).      Figure S3:  Secondary structure analysis of mGluR CTDs  using NMR . Secondary C chemical shifts for  the mGluR2 (A) and mGluR3  (B) CTDs free in solution.  Positive/negative deviations greater than 1.0 PPM  indicate a propensity for helical/ b-strand secondary structure, respectively.     . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 26, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 27, 'content': ' 27 Figure S 4: Mutating positively charged residues impacts CTD -membrane interactions.  1H-15N HSQC  spectra of mGluR2 CTD variants in the presence (purple) and absence (black) of 100 nm LUVs comprised  of 1:1 DOPS: DOPC.    Figure S 5: mGluR CTDs LUVs binding as a function of vesicle size.  (A) NMR i ntensity ratio plots  for  the mGluR2 -CTD in the presence of DOPS LUVs of varying diameter. (B) Averag ed intensity ratios over  the first ~20 residues  (Q822 -A842)  (s.e.m. ). (C) Averag ed intensity ratios over the last ~20 residues   (Q853 -L872) (s.e.m. ).     Figure S 6: Lipid titration identifies weaker and stronger interaction regions of the mGluR3 CTD.   (A) NMR  intensity ratios for the mGluR3 -CTD in the presence of varying concentrations of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC  LUVs. (B) Average intensity ratios over different regions of the mGluR3 C TD highlight the greater sensitivity  of the S/T -rich region to lipid concentration  (s.e.m. ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 27, 'content': '    Figure S 7: MD simulations capture mGluR3 CTD -membrane interactions and confirm absence of  regular secondary structure . (A-F) (i, left) snapshots of starting and ending frames of each MD simulation   replica of the mGluR3 TM7 -CTD construct with the protein shown in black cartoon representation and lipid  phosphates as orange spheres; ( ii, middle ) average residue distance from the phosphate plane in each  replica with error bars corresponding to standard deviations; (iii , right ) Percent of trajectory frames for each  CTD residue residing in disordered (black), helical (red), or beta -sheet (blue) secondary structure  during  each replica trajector y.    Figure S 8: Comparison and a nalysis of MD simulation replicas.  (A) Radius of gyration for the CTD  (residues 830 -879) during the course of each MD replica. (B) Violin plots of radii of gyration for each MD  replica annotated with mean (thick dotted line) and one standard deviation (thin dotted lines). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 27, 'content': '(C)  Comparison of the intensity ratio s for the  mGluR3 CTD in the presence of 2.5 mM 1:1 DOPS:DOPC LUVs   (blue, rig ht axis) with the average distance of each residue from the lipid phosphate plane over the course  of the MD replica 5  (black, left axis).  Note that the discrepancy at the very N -terminus may arise from the  CTD being membrane -anchored in the simulations but  not in the NMR experiments.  (D) Total number of  hydrogen bonds between side chains of each CTD residue  and DOPS lipid headgroups from MD replica 5.  (E, F)  Position of arginine side chains relative to the phosphate plane of the membrane  (see methods)   throu ghout the time course of  MD replica 5 (E) and 6 (F). (G) Total number of hydrogen bonds summed  from MD replicas 5 and 6  between each  arginine  side chain  and DOPC or  DOPS lipid headgroups ,  highlighting the preference for interact ions with negatively charged PS headgroups.     Figure S 9: Y853 and cancer -associated mutations modulate membrane binding of  the mGlur3 S/T- rich region . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 27, 'content': '(A) Distance from phosphate plane of side chains in the S/T -rich region as a function of time   for Y853 and nearby S/T residues  in MD replica 6. (B) Snapshots of S/T residues in the S/T -rich region  position relative to the membrane highlighting the dynamics of the region during our simulations.  Side  chains are shown as spheres (Ser in green and Thr  in blue) and lipid phosphates are shown as orange  spheres.   Protein backbone is in gray cartoon  (C) 1H-15N HSQC spectra of mGluR3 CTD variants in the  presence (purple) and absence (black) of 1:1 DOPS: DOPC. (D) NMR i ntensity ratio s WT (dotted blue line),   Y853A (purple), G848E (orange), and E870K (red)  mGluR3 -CTD in the presence of 10 mM 100 nm   diameter  LUVs com prised of 1:1  DOPS: DOPC 100 nm LUVs .     Figure S 10: Surface expression of CTD -mutants and functional effects of G848E on mGluR3 activity.  (A) Surface expression quantification for all the mutants tested in the study (One -way ANOVA with multiple  comparisons; * p<0.05, *** p<0.001. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 27, 'content': '(B-C) Representative traces of evoked GIRK potassium currents after  mGluR3 activation by different doses of glutamate  (10 nM, 100 nM and 10 M) in WT (B) and G848E  mutant (C).      . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 28, 'content': ' 28     Figure 1:  An NMR -based assay reveals phospholipid membrane binding of  the intrinsically  disordered m GluR2 and mGluR3  CTDs.  (A) Schematic  of the structural organization of mGluR domains  highlighting  the location of the CTD compared to the ordered parts  of the protein and the membrane. (B)  Schematic of NMR -based CTD -membrane binding assay that  takes advantage of changes in tumbling rates  of the CTD due to interactions with LUVs . (C) 1H-15N HSQC spectra of isolated mGluR2* and (D) mGluR3*  CTD in the presence (red) and absence (black) of 10 mM 100  nm diameter LUVs comprised of DOPS at  pH 6.8 at 10 C, with zoomed insets of crowded regions, highlighting loss of signal of specific residues in  the presence of LUVs.        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 28, 'content': 'It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 29, 'content': ' 29     . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 30, 'content': ' 30 Figure 2: N -terminal regions of mGluR2 and 3 CTDs interact with negatively charged  lipids.  NMR   intensity ratio s for (A) mGluR2 and (B) mGluR3  from spectra collected with and without LUVs of three  different lipid compositions. Prolines, which do not give rise to signals in 1H-15N HSQC spectra, are denoted  by *, overlapping peaks for which values were not included  by ** , and residues not detected  in the spectra   by *** . (C) Averaged intensity ratios over the first ~20  residues (mGluR2 Q822 -A842; mGluR3 Q831 -T851)  illustrate the lipid composition dependence of the interactions in this region ( s.e.m .). (D) Averaged intensity  ratios over the last  ~20 residues (mGluR2 Q853 -L872; mGluR3 Y861 -L879) illustrate the lack of li pid  composition dependence of the interactions in this region ( s.e.m. ).      . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 30, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 31, 'content': ' 31     Figure 3: An N -terminal cluster of basic residues is critical for CTD membrane binding.  (A) sequence   alignment of the first 15 residues of the mGluR2 and mGluR 3 CTDs  highlight ing conserved ( *) and positively  charged ( highlighted ) residues . (B) Intensity ratio plots of mGluR2 CTD constructs containing alanine  substitutions for each of the four basic residu es from spectra collected with and without  LUVs containing a  1:1 mixture of DOPS:DOPC lipids.  (C) Averaged intensity ratios over the first ~20  residues (Q822 -A842)   illustrate the regional effect of each mutation for LUVs of different lipid composition ( s.e.m.). (D) Averaged  intensity ratios over the last  ~20 residues (Q853 -L872) illustrate the regional effect of each mutation for  LUVs of different lipid composition ( s.e.m. ).       . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 31, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 32, 'content': ' 32     Figure 4: Molecular dynamics simulations reveal multi -modal membrane interactions of the  intrinsically disordered mGluR3 -CTD.  (A) Snapshots of mGluR3 TM7 -CTD replica 6 trajectory ,  highlighting three conformations of the CTD: the beginning of the simulation with  no membrane contacts  (t=0, left), a highly  extended me mbrane -binding mode ( t=174.4 ns, middle ), and a partially extended  binding  (t=224 ns, right)  (B) Comparison of the intensity ratio s for the  mGluR3 CTD in the presence of 1:1  DOPS:DOPC LUVs  (blue, right axis) with the average distance of each residue from the lipid phosphate  plane over the course of the simulation (black, left axis). (C) Interactions between CTD residue side chains  and lipids: Left, black  total number of hydrogen bonds between each side chain  and lipid headgroups ;  Right, red  average percent buried surface area of each side chain in the membrane.        . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 32, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 33, 'content': ' 33     Figure 5: Membrane interactions of the S/T -rich region of the mGluR3 CTD is modulated by mutation  of a key residue and by cancer mutations.  (A) mGluR3 -CTD sequence annotated with the NMR - and  MD-determined membrane binding region and  the overlapping Ser/Thr -rich region (* denotes residues   conserved in mGluR2 ).  (B) Snapshots of residue Y853 (shown as slate blue spheres) in membrane - embedded and membrane -associated positions (from MD replica 6) . Lipid phosphates are shown as  transparent orange spheres and lipid chains in contact with Y853 are shown  in stick representation  (DOPS  in magenta and DOPC in salmon). Remaining lipids are shown in transparent gray and the protein  backbone is shown in gray in cartoon  representation . (C) Percent buried surface area of Y853 in the lipid  bilayer plotted as a function of time in MD replica 6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 33, 'content': '(D) Comparison of the averaged integrated NMR  intensity ratio s of WT mGluR3 -CTD (dotted blue) with Y853A mGluR3 -CTD taken over the S/T-rich region   (S845-T860) as a function of LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ; Wilcoxon test; *p<0.05, ***p<0.001,  n.s.  p0.05) . (E) Snapshots of residues R843 (blue), G848 (orange) and E870 (red) at different time points  during  the time course of MD replica 6  showing  prolonged  membrane -association  of R843 and G848 and   fluctuating membrane -association of  E870  (side chains shown as spheres colored as in (F) below;  otherwise rendered and colored as above in (B)). (F) Position of side chains R843, G848, and E870 relative  to the phosphate plane of the membrane  (see methods)  throughout the time course of MD replica 6.  (G)  Comparison of the  averaged  NMR intensity ratio s of WT mGluR3 -CTD (dotted blue) with melanoma - associated mutations G848E mGluR3 -CTD (orange)  taken over the S/T-rich region  (S845-T860) as a  function of LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ; Wilcoxon test; **p<0.01, ***p<0.001) . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 33, 'content': '(H) and E870K mGluR3 - CTD (red) taken  over the last 19 residues ( Y861-L879) as a function of  LUV lipid composition  (s.e.m. ;  Wilcoxon test; ***p<0.001) .      . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 34, 'content': ' 34     Figure 6: CTD mutations that alter membrane binding affect  mGluR3  internalization and  function .   (A) Schematics of  mGluR3 CTD mutational positions and their effects on mGluR3 -CTD free vs. membrane  bound equilibrium. Larger arrows show the direction in which each  variant perturbs the equilibrium . (B)  Quantification of the extent of receptor internalization for each mGluR3  variant (with dotted line denoting  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 35, 'content': ' 35 mGluR3 WT internalization) (averaged internalization per day, 10 -12 images per condition/day and 4 -9  days per condition; One -Way ANOVA with multiple comparisons, * p<0.05 *** p<0.001) . (C) Representative  images of HEK  293T cells expressing SNAP -tagged mGluR3 variant s incubated for 30 min with 1 mM Glu  (red arrows represent internalized receptors ; scale bar: 5 m ). (D) Glutamate dose response curves for  mGluR3 variants  in a patch -clamp experiment using GIRK currents as a reporter for mGluR3 G -protein  activation (EC50: WT = 136.9  26.9 nM, G848E = 44.2  8.6 nM, Y853A = 417.8  64.8 nM,  E870K =  101.6  21.7 nM,  CA AX = 156.9  42.8 nM; F -test of EC50 shifts; **p<0.01, ***p<0.001).  (E) Quantification  of the extent of  recepor  internalization of WT mGluR3 vs. Y853D phospho -mimetic muta nt (averaged  internalization of 10 images per condition/day across 3 days; t-test; *p<0.05 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 35, 'content': '(F) Representative images of  HEK293T cells expressing SNAP -tagged mGluR3 WT vs Y853A treated with 100 ng/ml EGF for 30 min  (red arrows represent internalization ; scale bar: 5 m ). (G) Quantification of the extent of  internalization for  mGluR3 WT vs Y853A mutant in EGF or Glu+EGF incubated conditions (averaged internalization per day,  10 images condition/day and 3 -4 days per condition ; t-test, **p<0.0 1 , n.s. p0.05 ). (H) Working model of  mGluR 3-CTD free vs. membrane bound equilibrium and changes that favor the  less accessible  membrane - bound (E870K, anionic lipids) or the more accessible free (Y853A, G848E, phosphorylation) state.       . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 36, 'content': ' 36     Figure S1: NMR spectra of mGluR2 and mGluR3  with LUVs of different compositions and of WT and  cysteine -free variants.  1H-15N HSQC spectra of mGluR2 (A,B)  and mGluR3 (D,E)  CTDs in the presence  (purple  or light blue ) and absence (black) of LUVs comprised of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC  (A,D) or DOPC (B,E)  with zoom ed insets of crowded regions highlighting loss of signal of specific residues in the presence of  LUVs. 1H-15N HSQC spectra of (C) mGluR2  WT (dark blue) and WT* (C 859A muta nt, red) CTD and (F)  mGluR3 WT (dark blue) and WT* (C866A mutant, red) CTD.  Chemical shift changes are confined to  residues in the immediate vicinity of the mutations.        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 36, 'content': '; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.16.553551doi: bioRxiv preprint ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 37, 'content': ' 37   . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 38, 'content': ' 38   Figure S2:  Secondary structure analysis of mGluR CTDs  using CD . Circular dichroism spectra of the  mGluR2  (A) and mGluR3 (B) CTD and mGluR2 (C) and mGluR3 (D) peptides encompassing the NMR  determined binding region (first 23 residues) in the  absence of LUVs (black) or in the  presence of 10 mM ,  100 nm diameter (A) or 50 nm diameter  (B-D) DOPC ( blue), 1:1 DOPS:DOPC ( purple ) or DOPS (red)  LUVs  under conditions where NMR indicates no (DOPC) or complete ( DOPS or 1:1 DOPS:DOPC) CTD binding.    Note that for (A) the sudden increase in signal below 205 nm results from increased scattering due to  the  use of 100 nm diameter LUVs in these samples. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 38, 'content': 'For (D) the spectra suggest a degree of  -strand  formation, possibly due to intermolecular interactions caused by the limited solubility of this  peptide  (E) CD spectra of mGluR3 peptides encompassing the NM R determined binding region (first 23  residues) in the  absence (black) or  presence of 40 mM SDS  (red)  or 71 mM DPC  (blue) . (F) CD spectra of  NTSR1 peptide free  in solution  (black)  and in the presence of 10 mM 50 nm diameter D OPS LUVs  (red) .  (G,H) Helical w heel representations of the first 20 residues of the mGluR2 (G) and mGluR3 (H) CTD  illustrating the lack of clear amphipathic character  (basic residue in blue, polar residues in yellow, apolar  residues in white).        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 39, 'content': ' 39     Figure S3:  Secondary structure analysis of mGluR CTDs  using NMR.  Secondary C chemical shifts for  the mGluR2 (A) and mGluR3  (B) CTDs free in solution.  Positive/negative deviations greater than 1.0 PPM  indicate a propensity for helical/ b-strand secondary structure, respectively.         . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 40, 'content': ' 40     Figure S 4: Mutating positively charged residues impacts CTD -membrane interactions.  1H-15N HSQC  spectra of mGluR2 CTD variants in the presence (purple) and absence (black) of 100 nm LUVs comprised  of 1:1 DOPS: DOPC.       . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 41, 'content': ' 41     Figure S 5: mGluR CTDs LUVs binding as a function of vesicle size.  (A) NMR i ntensity ratio plots  for  the mGluR2 -CTD in the presence of DOPS LUVs of varying diameter. (B) Averag ed intensity ratios over  the first ~20 residues  (Q822 -A842)  (s.e.m. ). (C) Averag ed intensity ratios over the last ~20 residues   (Q853 -L872) (s.e.m. ).        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 42, 'content': ' 42     Figure S 6: Lipid titration identifies weaker and stronger interaction regions of the mGluR3 CTD.   (A) NMR  intensity ratios for the mGluR3 -CTD in the presence of varying concentrations of 1:1 DOPS:DOPC  LUVs. (B) Average intensity ratios over different regions of the mGluR3 CTD highlight the greater sensitivity  of the S/T -rich region to lipid concentration  (s.e.m.).        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 43, 'content': ' 43     Figure S 7: MD simulations capture mGluR3 CTD -membrane interactions and confirm absence of  regular secondary structure . (A-F) (i, left) snapshots of starting and ending frames of each MD simulation   replica of the mGluR3 TM7 -CTD construct with the protein shown in black cartoon representation and lipid  phosphates as orange spheres; ( ii, middle ) average residue distance from the phosphate plan e in each  replica with error bars corresponding to standard  deviations; (iii , right ) Percent of trajectory frames for each  CTD residue residing in disordered (black), helical (red), or beta -sheet (blue) secondary structure  during  each replica trajectory.        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 43, 'content': '; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.16.553551doi: bioRxiv preprint ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 44, 'content': ' 44     Figure S 8: Comparison and a nalysis of MD simulation replicas.  (A) Radius of gyration for the CTD  (residues 830 -879) during the course of each MD replica. (B) Violin plots of radii of gyration for each MD  replica annotated with mean (thick dotted line) and one standard deviation (thin dotted lines ). (C)  Comparison of the intensity ratio s for the  mGluR3 CTD in the presence of 2.5 mM 1:1 DOPS:DOPC LUVs   (blue, right axis) with the average distance of each residue from the lipid phosphate plane over the course  of the MD replica 5  (black, left axis).  Note that the discrepancy at the very N -terminus may arise from the  CTD being membrane -anchored in the simulations but not in the NMR experiments.  (D) Total number of  hydrogen bonds between side chains of each CTD residue  and DOPS lipid headgroups from MD replica 5. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 44, 'content': ' (E, F)  Position of arginine side chains relative to the phosphate plane of the membrane  (see methods)   throughout the time course of  MD replica 5 (E) and 6 (F). (G) Total number of hydrogen bonds summed  from MD replicas 5 and 6 between each  arginine  side chain  and DOPC or  DOPS lipid headgroups ,  highlighting the preference for interact ions with negatively charged PS headgroups.        . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 45, 'content': ' 45     Figure S 9: Y853 and cancer -associated mutations modulate membrane binding of  the mGlur3 S/T- rich region . (A) Distance from phosphate plane of side chains in the S/T -rich region as a function of time   for Y853 and nearby S/T residues  in MD replica 6. (B) Snapshots of S/T residues in the S/T -rich region  position relative to the membrane highlighting the dynamics of the region during our simulations.  Side  chains are shown as spheres (Ser in green and Thr in blue) and lipid phosphates are shown as orange  spheres.   Protein backbone is in gray cartoon  (C) 1H-15N HSQC spectra of mGluR3 CTD var iants in the  presence (purple) and absence (black) of 1:1 DOPS: DOPC. (D) NMR i ntensity ratio s WT (dotted blue line),   Y853A (purple), G848E (orange), and E870K (red)  mGluR3 -CTD in the presence of 10 mM 100 nm   diameter  LUVs comprised of 1:1  DOPS: DOPC 100 nm LUVs .        . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 45, 'content': 'CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Control of G protein-coupled receptor function via membrane-interacting intrinsically disordered C-terminal domains', 'page': 46, 'content': ' 46     Figure S 10: Surface expression of CTD -mutants and functional effects of G848E on mGluR3 activity.  (A) Surface expression quantification for all the mutants tested in the study (One -way ANOVA with multiple  comparisons; * p<0.05, *** p<0.001. (B-C) Representative traces of evoked GIRK potassium currents after  mGluR3 activation by different doses of glutamate  (10 nM, 100 nM and 10 M) in WT (B) and G848E  mutant (C).    . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted August 17, 2023. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'ARTICLE Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis Siddhant Kalra1,7, Aayushi Mittal1,7, Krishan Gupta1,2, Vrinda Singhal1, Anku Gupta2, Tripti Mishra3, Srivatsava Naidu4, Debarka Sengupta1,2,5,6& Gaurav Ahuja1 Ectopically expressed olfactory receptors (ORs) have been linked with multiple clinically- relevant physiological processes. Previously used tissue-level expression estimation largelyshadowed the potential role of ORs due to their overall low expression levels. Even after theintroduction of the single-cell transcriptomics, a comprehensive delineation of expressiondynamics of ORs in tumors remained unexplored. Our targeted investigation into singlemalignant cells revealed a complex landscape of combinatorial OR expression events. Weobserved differentiation-dependent decline in expressed OR counts per cell as well as theirexpression intensities in malignant cells. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Further, we constructed expression signatures basedon a large spectrum of ORs and tracked their enrichment in bulk expression pro les of tumor samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). TCGA tumor samples strati ed based on OR-centric signatures exhibited divergent survival probabilities. In summary, our compre-hensive analysis positions ORs at the cross-road of tumor cell differentiation status andcancer prognosis.https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 OPEN 1Department of Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology-Delhi (IIIT-Delhi), Okhla, Phase III, New Delhi 110020, I ndia. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 1, 'content': '2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology-Delhi (IIIT-Delhi), Okhla, Phase III, New Delh i 110020, India.3Pathnder Research and Training Foundation, 30/7 and 8, Knowledge Park III, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201308, India.4Center for Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Bara Phool, Birla Seed Farms, Rupnagar, Punjab 140001, India.5Centre for Arti cial Intelligence, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Okhla Phase III, New Delhi 110020, India.6Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.7These authors contributed equally: Siddhant Kalra, Aayushi Mittal.email: debarka@iiitd.ac.in ;gaurav.ahuja@iiitd.ac.in COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |           (2020) 3:506 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 | www.nature.com/commsbio 11234567890():,;', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Sensory inputs play a vital role in many essential behaviors, ranging from the identi cation of prey or peer mates to the incoming danger14. Chemoreception, in particular, is a key sensory system, which is largely mediated by olfactory and tastereceptors 57. In the human genome, olfactory receptors (ORs) constitute the largest gene family with ~400 functional and ~600 non-functional pseudogenes8. These functional olfactory receptors are further classi ed into distinct subfamilies. In mammals, the olfactory receptor families include odorant receptor (ORs)9, vomeronasal type 1 and type 2 receptors (V1Rs and V2Rs)10, trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs)11, formyl peptide receptors (FPRs)12, and the membrane guanylyl cyclase (GC-D)13. Based on their evolutionary relationship, ORs, the largest gene sub-family, are further classi ed into Class I and Class II receptors9. Vomeronasal receptors (VRs), also known as pheromone recep- tors, are sub-classi ed into V1Rs and V2Rs10. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'TAARs, another subfamily of chemosensory receptors, are known to detect trace amines such as -phenylethylamine, p-tyramine, tryptamine, and octopamine14. Membrane-associated Guanylyl cyclase receptors have been shown to be activated by membrane diffusible nitric oxide and other ligands such as uroguanylin and guanylin15. The olfactory signal transduction initiates with the binding of odorants to the olfactory receptors, which in turn triggers the Galpha protein-mediated activation of adenylate cyclase, leading to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels16. Elevated cAMP levels interact and instigate the opening of cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels, resulting in the in ux of cations, mainly sodium (Na+) and calcium (Ca2+) ions, ulti- mately leading to the depolarization of olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs). This transient increase of the intracellular Ca2+ions triggers the opening of Ca2+-activated chloride (CaCCs) channels that amplify the CNG channel signal16. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Notably, in addition to their expression in the OSNs of the olfactory epithelium, ORs exhibit ectopic expression in non- olfactory tissues such as muscle, kidney, and keratinocytes1722. Advancements in the high-throughput sequencing technologies accelerated the systematic exploration of the ectopic chemosensoryreceptors in almost all human tissues 19. In addition to this, OR- expression has also been reported in epithelial malignancies2325. OR expression in non-olfactory tissues has been found to play a crucial role in various physio-molecular processes including wound healing, cellular motility, sperm chemotaxis, and the regeneration of muscle cells20,2628. Moreover, various functional studies high- lighted the therapeutic promise of ligand-mediated OR activation in cancer19,24. For instance, in the case of hepatocellular carcinoma, the activation of OR1A2 by citronellal leads to a cAMP-dependent increase in cytosolic Ca2+ions, thereby impeding cancer cell pro- liferation29. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Similarly, Troenan induced activation of OR51B4 in colorectal cancer cells inhibits their migratory potential and insti- gates apoptosis30. Moreover, in prostate cancer, activation of OR51E2 by an endogenous agonist, 19-hydroxyandrostenedione resulted in neuroendocrine trans-differentiation, revealing the functional implication of ORs in diverse physio-molecular pro- cesses31. In addition to this, in vitro activation of OR51E2 in vertical-growth phase melanoma cells by -ionone resulted in the activation of anti-proliferative, anti-migratory, and pro-apoptotic pathways32. Similar ndings have been reported for non-small-cell lung cancer where OR2J3 activation by helional leads to the induction of apoptosis and anti-proliferative pathways33.N o t a b l y , due to their expression speci city in the tumor-state, a handful of ORs have been identi ed as potential biomarkers e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'OR51E1 in small intestine neuroendocrine carcinomas34, OR7C1 in colorectal cancer35, PSGR in prostate cancer36, and OR2B6 in breast carci- nomas23. All these collectively reinforce the idea of the potential therapeutic and diagnostic function of these ectopic olfactory receptors.Traditional bulk-tissue based transcriptomics estimates the average expression of individual ORs across admixture of cell types within the highly heterogeneous tumor biopsies, leading to under-detection of lowly or selectively expressed ORs37,38. In the present study, we investigated the expression pro les of ORs in single malignant cells leveraging numerous publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) datasets. We could identify 59 previously unreported OR-tumor pairs. Our results indicate that across cancer types, intra-tumoral heterogeneity concurs with the number of expressed ORs per cell. Delineation of the breast epithelial malignant cells along the cellular differ- entiation trajectory revealed a substantial decrease in the cellular count of expressed ORs and their expression, along with the differentiation kinetics. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Finally, we were able to construct OR- centric transcriptomic signatures, which strati es breast cancer samples from TCGA into distinct groups with divergent survival probabilities. Results Widespread expression of OR genes in malignant cells .A c t i - vation and upregulation of the olfactory receptor genes in various cancer types are well established, however, in most cases, the assessment of the OR transcripts is achieved by pro ling of the bulk tumor samples, which largely masks both the OR expression as well as information about the contributing cell-types, thereby obscuring their adaptation in diagnosis and management of can- cers38. To address this, we developed a computational work ow (CancerSmell) that systematically estimates the activation status of the chemosensory olfactory and taste receptors at the single-cell resolution (Supplementary Fig. 1a). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Using this, we evaluated theexpression of these chemosensory receptors across 49 scRNA-seq datasets (tumor and cell lines), featuring 22 tumor types and col- lectively comprising 42,529 malignant cells (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Our work ow identi ed numerous chemoreceptor-tumor pairs which were largely unreported in cancer literature (Figs. 1a,2a, Supplementary Fig. 2a, b, d f ) .N o t a b l y ,a m o n gt h e m ,w eh a v e observed enrichment of OR genes in cancer, in contrast to TAARs, V2Rs and taste receptors (T1Rs and T2Rs), which is in line with the earlier reports, where the comparative enrichment of ORs is reported in the cancer cells, in contrast to other chemosensory receptors (Fig. 1a, cf, Supplementary Fig. 2c, d f; Supplementary Data 1). Next, we sought to determine the speci city and exclusivity of the identi ed ORs towards cancer-types. Further assessment of these results revealed two distinct classes of ORs, based on their tumor speci city. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'For example, OR8B8 and OR8H1 were exclu- sively detected in malignant breast epithelial cells, whereas OR1A1 and OR2M3 activation were observed in 11 and 10 different tumor types respectively, suggesting a distinct mode of expression reg- ulation (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. 2a, b; Supplementary Data 2). Of note, ORs with pseudo-gene status were vastly undetected across the studied expression datasets (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). Next, we asked if tumor-associated ORs exhibit bias towards certain genomic loci. In our analysis, all the detected ORs were restricted to only 10 chromosomes, out of the 21 OR coding chromosomes 39,w i t h chromosome 11 harboring the largest fraction of these receptors (Fig. 1b). We observed a high degree of variability in their expression and cellular detection frequency, alluding to their potential contribution in tumor heterogeneity (Fig. 1e, f). Func- tional studies elucidating the role of these tumor-associated olfac- tory receptors indicate the involvement of these receptors in regulating key cancer-related pathways40. For this purpose, we used the Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) library. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Our results indi- cate that a signi cant proportion of the detected ORs are implicated in processes such as stemness, metastasis, invasion and differ- entiation (Fig. 2be, Supplementary Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Fig. 1 Comprehensive catalog of tumor-associated ORs at the single-cell resolution. a Phylogenetic tree representing ORs sequence relationships and their detection status in 14 distinct cancer types. The tree was constructed using the PhyML algorithm. The protein sequences of the functional ORs we re aligned using the MUSCLE sequence alignment algorithm. Colored circles represent the tumor types and the branch colors represent the source information. The green, purple, and red branch color represent the presence of the indicated OR in the cell line, tumor, or both respectively. bIdeogram illustrating the chromosomal location of all the functional ORs in humans. Red lines represent the genomic loci of the functional ORs reliably detect ed in the malignant cells (tumor or cell lines), whereas cyan lines represent the genomic loci of ORs that are not detected in any tumor-types or cell lines under investigation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'The identities of the malignant cells-associated ORs are indicated in the box. cBar graph representing the percentage of OR-positive malignant cells in the indicated ten different tumor single-cell datasets. zFPKM algorithm was used for the determination of the OR activation statu s (zFPKM > 3, activated). The percentage of active cells (OR-positive) represents the proportion of cells possessing zFPKM values > 3 for any functional OR.dUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) based embedding of single-cell expression pro les representing the distinct cell types in the indicated tumor datasets. Different clusters are depicted with distinct colors. Cells within a cluster represent similar cell types at the trans criptome level. Markers for each cluster are indicated as text. These markers were identi ed by using the FindAllMarkers function of the Seurat (v 3.1.1). eUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAPs) depicting the relative expression of the representative ORs in the indicated single-cell tumor data sets. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Cells within a cluster represent similar cell types. fDensity-histograms depicting the normalized expression of the indicated ORs in the corresponding tumor type. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Aberration of the one-receptor one-cell rule in cancer .O Rg e n e expression is tightly regulated in the OSNs, leading to the expression of a single OR gene in a mature neuron41,42.W e sought to determine if similar transcriptional regulation is also applicable during ectopic OR expression in the malignant cells. To test this, we rst estimated the cellular frequencies of co- expressed ORs across scRNA-seq datasets of numerous tumors or cell lines. Our results suggest that unlike mature OSNs, asignicant proportion of the malignant cells express multiple ORs, except in the case of tumors related to the nervous system i.e. glioblastoma and astrocytoma, where we found malignant cells to obey the one or none rule (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. 3a). Next, we asked whether the co-expression of ORs in tumors is tightly regulated or stochastic in nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Our results indicate that the selection of the expressed ORs within a single cell is stochastic and is poorly correlated to their expression (BRCA dataset; R=0.34; p-value < 0.0001) (Fig. 3b, c, Supple- mentary Fig. 3g, h). Past reports evaluating the expression of chemosensory receptors in healthy tissues revealed the presence of multiple ORs 23,43. We, therefore, examined the exclusivity of the ORs expressed in tumors. Comparative analysis revealed that the number of activated OR genes are systematically higher inthe malignant state. Only a sub-fraction of these (14 out of 53 BRCA-associated ORs) were detected in healthy cells (Fig. 3df; Supplementary Fig. 3b d; Supplementary Data 4), which is lar- gely in line with the previous reports19. Among all the studied cancer types, breast malignancies portrayed the maximum rela- tive abundance of OR transcripts, inspiring us to closely pursue the concerned cancer type. We, therefore, estimated the pro- pensity of expressing multiple ORs per cell in the distinctmolecular subtypes of breast cancer. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Noteworthily Triple- Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) cells, being the most aggres- sive breast cancer subtype 44, displayed the highest levels of enrichment of OR repertoire (Supplementary Fig. 3e; Supple- mentary Data 5). Moreover, we observed no signi cant varia- tions in breast carcinoma-associated ORs expression across the molecular subtypes (Bonferroni corrected P-value > 0.05) (Sup- plementary Fig. 3f). Further, we inspected the coherence of OR expression with the well-known, cancer-related functional states. We observed an inverse relationship between OR enrichment and pro-tumor signatures such as invasion, metastasis, pro- liferation, and DNA damage (Fig. 3f). Notably, for some ORs, a positive correlation was observed between their expression and signatures related to stemness, differentiation, and angiogenesis, Fig. 2 Functional enrichment analysis of tumor-associated ORs revealed their potential role in regulating key cancer-related pathways. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'a Estimation of the olfactory repertoire at the single-cell resolution revealed previous unreported cancer-associated olfactory receptors, represented here as a Pie Chart. CancerSmell computational work ow identi ed 59 previously unreported malignant cells-associated ORs. bGene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) revealed the functional relevance of the indicated olfactory receptors in tumor-related processes, indicated here as the Alluvial plot. The activated (GSVA score > 0 and corrected p-value < 0.01) and inactivated (GSVA score <0 and corrected p-value < 0.01) status of the indicated biological pathways is represented along the horizontal bar. cBox plots depicting the correlation between GSVA scores and the OR expression in the indicated tumor-related signatures. The X-axis represents the total number of ORs identi ed to be regulating the indicated biological process. The color of the box represents distinct tumor signatures (mentioned in Panel bof Fig. 2). dScatter plots representing the correlation between GSVA scores for metastasis signature and OR4F17 in the breast carcinoma cells. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The R-value designates the correlation coef cient, whereas the p-value indicates the statistical signi cance. eScatter plots representing the correlation between GSVA scores for invasion signature and OR5A1 in the lung adenocarcinoma cells. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'implying their contrasting implications in the activation of cancer-related biological pathways (Fig. 3g). Past studies (both in vivo or in vitro models )have linked ligand-mediated OR activation with multiple non-canonical molecular processes. To this end, we segregated the single-cell malignant breast epithelial cells based on the overall enrichment of expressed OR genes andfunctionally annotated the differential genes between the con- cerned cell-groups (Fig. 3h, Supplementary Data 6). Key mole- cular processes thus retrieved, included regulation of cell cycle, transcriptional or translational regulation, autophagy, etc. (Fig. 3i, j, Supplementary Fig. 3i). To summarize, our results suggest that cellular count of expressed ORs and their respective Fig. 3 Cancer cells express multiple olfactory receptors. a Cellular count of expressed ORs largely varies across multiple tumor types, depicted here as a percentage bar graph in the indicated tumor-types. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'zFPKM algorithm was used for the determination of the OR activation status (zFPKM > 3, activated). bUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAPs) representation of the cellular expression of two representatives ORs in the breast carcinom a single-cell dataset. The red-colored arrows indicate the OR2M3 expressing malignant cells, whereas the green arrow denotes the OR1A1 expressing malignant cells. Notably, the cells indicated via blue arrows co-express both of these receptors. The scale bar on the right represents the relative e xpression values of the indicated ORs. cDensity plot depicting the expression variability between the indicated ORs in the breast carcinoma single-cell dataset. The p-value signi cance and the correlation coef cient is depicted on the right. dGraphical illustration depicting the total number of single cells and the reliably detected ORs in the healthy and malignant breast epithelial cells. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'ePercentage bar graph depicting the relative proportion of detected ORs in the indicated healthy and malignant epithelial cells. The different conditions (healthy, tissue, CTC, and PDX) are indicated by different colors. fVenn diagram depicting the number of overlapping ORs in the indicated conditions. gBar graph depicting the correlation between GSVA scores of the indicated biological process and ORs expression across all cells. Notably, the positive and negative correlated values are indicated in red and green colored bars, respectively. hSchematic representation depicting the strategy employed for differential gene expression analysis. Notably, the malignant cells were segregate d into two subcategories based on the expression of ORs per cell. Differentially expressed genes were calculated using the Wilcox test. iMetascape analysis of differentially expressed genes depicting the functional importance of BRCA-associated ORs in the highlighted biological/molecular processes. jHeatmap depicting cluster-wise enrichment of the prominent biological functions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Scale bar represents the negatively log-transformed (base 10) p-values.COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |           (2020) 3:506 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 | www.nature.com/commsbio 5', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'expression levels concur with clonal heterogeneity in breast tumors, both at the molecular and functional levels. Correlation between ORs and tumor differentiation status . Recent reports studying mammals suggest the involvement of a special epigenetic mechanism behind the simultaneous expressionof multiple ORs in developmentally immature neurons 41,45. Cancer cells also undergo extensive epigenetic reprogramming such as DNA methylation, promoter hypermethylation, change in chromatin structure, and histone modi cations during intratu- mor cellular (de)differentiation46. Such changes are known to be responsible for the dysregulation of the cell cycle control, thereby affecting cell proliferation and survival mechanisms of the cell. To this end, we tracked the change in the cellular count of expressed ORs in the context of cancer-cell differentiation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'For this, we performed pseudo-time based reconstruction of the differentia- tion trajectories underpinning clonal expansion of malignant breast epithelial cells47. Notably, the breast cancer single-cell dataset consists of single-cell expression pro les of 11 treatment- naive and 1 under-treatment patients (Supplementary Data 7). Our initial analysis was performed on cells from all molecular subtypes, except the cells from patient BC05, who reportedly underwent neoadjuvant immunotherapy. Monocle yielded three main branches elucidating the emergence of differential patho- logical stages entailing molecular subtypes (Supplementary Fig. 4a d). Notably, for this analysis, we manually selected the starting-point of the inferred trajectory based on the low- dimensional spatial agglomeration of cells harboring maximumrelative stemness scores (Supplementary Fig. 4c). A negative correlation was observed between pseudotime and cellular stemness ( Rstemness=0.27, pvalue=<0.0001) (Supplementary Fig. 4e). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'In contrast, minor ( R=0.2) or no signi cant correlation (R=0.021, p-value=0.75) was observed between cellular OR expression or the number of expressed ORs per cell along the pseudotime, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 4f, g). Upon closer inspection of the individual subpopulation of Luminal cells, it offered a strong negative correlation between pseudotime and cellular count of expressed ORs ( RORfrequency =0.85, pvalue= <0.0001) (Fig. 4ac, Supplementary Fig. 4i). Moreover, similar results were obtained for cellular stemness along the pseudotime (Rstemness=0.77, pvalue=<0.0001) (Supplementary Fig. 4h). Conversely, we have observed a strong positive correlation between cellular stemness and its expressed OR repertoire ( R= 0.55, pvalue=<0.001) (Supplementary Fig. 4j). Next, we asked whether such a steep decline in the cellular count of expressed ORs or their expression along the cellular differentiation trajec- tory is speci c to malignancy. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'To test this, we have conducted a similar analysis with the healthy luminal breast epithelial cells which revealed no signi cant anti-correlation ( R=0.048, pvalue=0.4) (Fig. 4df, Supplementary Fig. 4k n; Supplemen- tary Data 7). ORs-centric signatures stratify BRCA tumors . Tumor envir- onments harbor multiple cell-types, thereby obscuring the detectability of cancer-speci c ORs through bulk transcriptomics. In breast cancer, the differentiation stage is used as a parameter Fig. 4 Cellular decrease of expressed ORs with higher differentiation status. a Monocle-generated pseudotemporal trajectory of malignant breast epithelial cells of luminal A molecular subtype of breast carcinoma, depicting the decrease in cellular stemness during cellular differentiation t ime-course (pseudotime). The cells with high stemness properties were selected as a starting point. Arrowheads indicate the direction of cellular differentia tion across the pseudotime. Scale bar represents the pseudotime. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'bUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) represents the decrease in the number of expressed OR genes per malignant cell in luminal A subtype in breast carcinoma during pseudotemporal trajectory. Scale bar represents the number o f expressed OR genes per cell. Arrowheads indicate the direction of cellular differentiation across the pseudotime. cScatter plots depicting an overall decrease in the expression of representative ORs along the pseudotemporal trajectory in the indicated conditions. Scale bar represents the number o f expressed OR genes per cell. dPseudotemporal trajectory of healthy luminal breast epithelial cells. Arrowheads indicate the direction of cellular differentiation. Scale bar represents the pseudotime. eUniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) representing the number of expressed OR genes per cell in the healthy luminal breast epithelial cells along the pseudotemporal trajectory. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'fScatter plots depicting the expression dynamics of representative ORs along the pseudotemporal trajectory in the indicated conditions.ARTICLE COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 6 COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY |           (2020) 3:506 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01232-5 | www.nature.com/commsbio', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'for the histopathological grading of tumor samples. To date, the clinical assessment and prognosis are largely done using The Nottingham Grading System, which incorporates the differ- entiation status of the tumor cells48. In furtherance to our observation about the overall decline in the cellular OR number/ expression associated with differentiation, we asked if multi- variate OR signatures can be used to deconvolute the bulk expression pro les and could segregate patients with distinct survival. To test this, we rst constructed the OR-centric sig- nature capturing the co-activation of the expressed ORs (Sup- plementary Fig. 5a c; Supplementary Data 8). Next, we projected these OR-centric signatures on TCGA bulk-transcriptomic breast carcinoma data49, annotated with survival information, and obtained multiple patient groups, with at least two major groups having signi cantly distinct survival probabilities (Fig. 5ac). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Notably, we obtained consistent results from signatures con- structed from three independent and biologically distinct breast cancer single-cell datasets, suggesting the robustness of the OR- centric signatures in tumor classi cation. Further dissection of this multivariate analysis revealed that the patient group posses- sing higher cosine distance with the OR-centric signatures representing the low number of expressed OR genes per cell harbors a good prognosis and better survival, which largely unmatches with estimated tumor stage of the patients (Fig. 5df, Supplementary Fig. 5d f; Supplementary Fig. 6a c). Taken together, these results reinforce the potential clinical relevance oftumor-associated ORs and demonstrate the prognostic value of the cell-type-speci c, OR-centric signatures inferred from single- cell transcriptomes. Discussion Dysregulation of the core transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in cancer results in the ectopic expression of normally silent genes50,51. One such example of the silent gene family is olfactory receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'In addition to their expression in the sensory epithe-lium of the nose, a large proportion of the ORs are reported to be expressed in non-olfactory tissues, both under homeostatic as well as in pathological states such as cancer. Notably, both the expression as well as the number of expressed ORs highly increases in the malignant states (reviewed in ref. 19). Although functional analysis with a handful of ORs has shown promising results in cancer diagnostics and therapeutics19, still a compre- hensive understanding of their presence in multiple tumor-types, their functional role in tumorigenesis, and ultimately in the tumor prognosis remains unclear. The present study addresses this gap by tracking OR expression in single malignant cells entailing 22 cancer types (tissues and cell lines) and 42,529 malignant cells. We reported 68 tumor-OR pairs, among which only ~15% have been mentioned in cancer literature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'To the best of our knowledge, this is the rst comprehensive single-cell study presenting a comprehensive analysis of the ectopically expressed Fig. 5 Single-cell transcriptome signatures stratify breast tumors into subgroups with distinct patient survival. a Kaplan Meier plot depicting the patient s survival in the indicated groups (indicated with colors) segregated based on the cosine similarity between OR-enrichment signatures, inferred from tissue-derived scRNA-sequencing pro ling of malignant cells. bKaplan Meier plot depicting the patient s survival in the indicated groups (indicated with colors) segregated based on the cosine similarity towards OR-enrichment signatures, inferred from single-cell transcriptional pro ling of circulating tumor cells. cKaplan Meier plot depicting the patient s survival in the indicated groups (indicated with colors) segregated based on the cosine similarity towards OR-enrichment signatures, inferred from transcriptomic pro ling of breast carcinoma patient-derived xenograft-derived dataset. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'dHeatmap depicting the relative enrichment of breast tumor-derived ORs in the indicated subgroups of TCGA patients of breast carcinoma. eHeatmap depicting the relative enrichment of breast cancer circulating tumor cells-derived ORs in the indicated subgroups of TCGA patients of breast carcinoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'olfactory and taste chemosensory receptors (functional ORs, pseudo OR genes, TAARs, V2Rs, taste receptor type 1 (T1Rs), and taste receptor type 2 (T2Rs) across multiple cancer-types. Molecular and functional analysis of the breast carcinoma-associated ORs alluded to their potential role in tumor cell (de) differentiation. Moreover, assessment of the DNA aberrations in the tumor-associated OR genes in breast carcinoma indicated DNA ampli cation events, which could be one of the underlying reasons for their upregulated expression in cancer (Supplemen- tary Fig. 6d f). In summary, we took advantage of the single-cell transcriptomics datasets and derived OR-centric signatures which could robustly stratify BRCA bulk tumor samples from TCGA with divergent survival probabilities. Ectopically expressed ORs were rst reported in the mamma- lian germ cells 52and soon after, a multitude of effort was invested to uncover their expression across multiple human tissues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The availability of the high throughput next-generation transcriptome approaches, such as bulk RNA sequencing and microarray further accelerated this search and till now the expression of multiple ectopic ORs is reported in various human tissues under the homeostatic condition18,53,54. Interestingly, in addition to their reported expression in the healthy tissues, the past literature also offers a number of independent anecdotes linking elevated expression of speci c ORs with the molecular prognosis of spe- cic cancers23,24,27,33,36,43. Such examples include OR51B5 and OR2AT4 in leukemia55,OR7C1 in colorectal cancer35,OR51E2 in melanoma32,OR10H1 in bladder cancer56,OR51E2 in prostate cancer31,OR51E1 in small intestine cancer34, and OR2B6 in breast carcinoma23,43. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Interestingly, the functional validations involving ligand-mediated activation of the aforementioned cancer-associated ORs resulted in a decrease in cancer cell pro- liferation or the complete cessation of the cancer growth, which further suggests their importance in clinical setups. Notably, expression evaluation of these therapeutically relevant OR transcripts has been primarily achieved by targeted assays57, which mask the information about the contributing cell-types and the expressing ORs. Single-cell transcriptomics circumvents theseshortcomings by enabling investigation at the levels of individual cells, wherein cell-type identi ability remains tractable 58,59. Added to it, single-cell expression allowed us to track the func- tionally interpretable combinatorial expression of ORs. Interest- ingly, the number of expressed ORs per cell systematically declined with luminal A cell differentiation, proving it to be a powerful molecular signature for cancer grading. Notably, such a negative correlation is exclusive to cell malignancy. Prognostic value of ORs was reinforced as we obtained distinct survival groups, simply by tracking the enrichment of key OR-centric molecular signatures in TCGA tumor samples. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'In this study, we make several observations shedding light on the potential rela- tionship between widespread expression of a large spectrum of ORs and expansion/differentiation of cancer clones. Despite their presence in the malignant cells, so far the experimental validation of their predictive role in tumor-related molecular pathways is still elusive. Moreover, the majority of the identi ed ORs are orphan receptors, therefore, in order to delineate their con- tribution in tumor biology, identi cation of their agonist or antagonist is the rst step forward. We assume that the cancer- specic metabolic intermediates could be the potential endo- genous agonists for these cancer-speci c ectopic ORs. Since the present results link the cellular count of expressed ORs with tumor cell differentiation, therefore, it is important to function- ally validate these ndings by the loss-of-function experiments. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Notably, in the eld of cancer biology, there are numerous well characterized phenotypic manifestations such as Epithelial-to- Mesenchymal transition60, cancer cell stemness61and blockage of immune checkpoints62that are known to play a signi cant role inthe disease progression and survival. Our results introduce ORs as a new dimension to the understanding of cellular differentiation and prognosis in cancer, which requires further investigations. Methods Computational work ow of Cancer Smell . Cancer Smell computational work ow was used to identify the potential chemosensory receptor gene reliably expressed insingle-cell RNA sequencing cancer datasets. It contains inbuilt information about human-speci c chemosensory receptor repertoire, which was manually curated from public databases i.e. The Human Olfactory Data Explorer, Horde database (https://genome.weizmann.ac.il/horde/ ) 63and Uniprot ( https://www.uniprot.org ). Cancer Smell takes a raw TPM matrix as input in which the genes and cell Idinformation are arranged in rows and columns, respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'To ensure that the input data matrix represents single cells, Cancer Smell utilizes scrublet (v0.2.1) 64, a python package that was used on python v3.7.0. Notably, the cells which qualifythe singlet criteria were used in the subsequent downstream analysis. Cancer Smell utilizes zFPKM (v1.8.0) 65, a Bioconductor package for the estimation of the gene activation status. It uses a recommended cutoff i.e. zFPKM value > 3 for the active genes65. For the downstream steps, Cancer Smell utilizes Seurat (v3.1.1)66for data scaling, normalization, dimension reduction, and clustering. Removal of doublet cells in scRNA-seq datasets . This step is performed to selectively identify and lter concatenated cells in the scRNA-seq dataset. The python script based on scrublet (0.2.1)64(available on the GitHub link), takes a raw TPM or FPKM matrix as an input. The cell information is represented in rows whereas the columns contain gene names. Scrublet returns a boolean matrix with information about the doublet status of each cell. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The doublet cells were ltered from the matrix and the remaining cells were subjected to further downstreamanalysis. Identi cation of gene activation status . zFPKM approach was used to determine the set of genes that are functionally active and inactive in a particular cell 65.B y using the zFPKM package in R, the expression scores were converted into zFPKM scores and the median value of these scores for each gene was computed. The geneswhich possess the median value of the scores > 3 were considered as active. Classi cation of cell-types by Seurat software suite . The downstream analysis for every single cell across a pan tumor was implemented using Seurat (v3.1.1) 66. Theltered expression matrix is used as an input le for the downstream analysis. The inbuilt function CreateSeuratObject converts the input data le into a Seurat class R object. Further, the data was scaled and normalized and the principal components were identi ed using ScaleData and RunPCA functions respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'KNN graph-based approach based on euclidean distance was used to cluster the data points for which FindCluster inbuilt function was used with its default parameters. Once the clusters were obtained, they were overlaid with the metadata to decipher meaningful biological information. Each cell was classi ed as positive and negative depending on the expression of chemosensory receptors withinthat cell. Pathway enrichment analysis using GSVA . The functional state of the cell harboring chemosensory receptors was estimated using Gene Set Variation Ana- lysis (GSVA; v1.34.0) 67, a non-parametric unsupervised method used for pathway enrichment for each sample. In this study, fourteen distinct tumor-related sig-natures were used, namely angiogenesis, apoptosis, cell cycle, differentiation, DNA damage, DNA repair, EMT, hypoxia, in ammation, invasion, metastasis, pro- liferation, quiescence, and stemness. Construction of phylogenetic tree . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'SeaView software (v1:4.6.4-1) was used for constructing a sequence-based phylogenetic tree. FASTA sequences of functional ORs were downloaded from the Ensembl genome browser (BioMart) and were used to construct the unrooted phylogenetic tree. The sequences were aligned usingMUSCLE (Multiple Sequence Comparison by Log Expectation) and the PhyML algorithm was used for tree construction. Implementation of additional graphical features was performed using an interactive tree of life (iTOL) ( https://itol.embl.de/ ). Ideogram construction . WashU Epigenome Browser (v46.2) with human genome version Hg38 as a reference genome was used for the ideogram construction. The two-color scheme was used to discriminate between cancer-associated (red) and non-cancer-associated ORs (blue). Functional enrichment analysis . To identify the differentially expressed genes between the cells harboring high and low numbers of expressed ORs, we rst calculated the median of the OR count across all cells. Next, we segregated the cell population (cluster-wise) based on the median value. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Lastly, we calculated thedifferential gene expression analysis using the Wilcox-test. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Pseudo temporal Ordering of single cells using Monocle 3 . Cell fate decisions and differentiation trajectories were reconstructed with the Monocle 3 package. This computational work ow utilizes reverse graph embedding based on a user- dened gene list to generate a pseudotime plot that can account for both branched and linear differentiation processes. In order to understand how the changes in theOR expression or their cellular counts relate to breast cancer cell stemness, we initially computed the degree of stemness in each individual malignant cell for the determination of the starting point for the trajectory formation. The extent ofstemness for a particular cell was calculated using the GSVA scores for Stemness, which collectively assigns a stemness score for each cell using known bona de stem cell signatures. Ordering of the cells in the 2D space was achieved using an inbuilt function of Monocle 347. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 9, 'content': 'We manually set the starting point of the trajectory from the cluster where the cells collectively possess a maximum stemness score. Esti-mation of the cellular count of expressed ORs and their mean expression pattern were plotted along the pseudotime. Classi cation of bulk tumor pro les. Generation of a ne-grained gene expres- sion signature that harbors information about the cellular count of expressed ORs and their individual expression levels from single-cell sequencing datasets wasperformed as follows. The Expression data matrix (TCGA and single-cell breast cancer datasets) were log 2transformed (log 2(TPM+1)) and the estimation of the number of expressed ORs per cell was performed based on zFPKM cutoff (> 3). We applied this criterion for the estimation of active/non-active ORs in each malignant cell and obtained the binary matrix for downstream clustering (if zFPKM =<3 then 0, otherwise 1). Clustering on the resulting OR binary matrix was performed using the hierarchical clustering method. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 9, 'content': 'In all the cases (three independent breast cancer datasets), we obtained multiple clusters representing cellsubpopulations with distinct numbers of expressed ORs per cell. Using this information, we computed the OR signatures (each signature represents a different number of expressed ORs per cell) and projected them on tumor samples fromTCGA. Single cell-based OR signatures were generated by averaging all cells within a cluster. The projection of the obtained signatures on the TCGA bulk tumor proles was determined using cosine similarity A ;B   A/C1B AjjjjBjjjjPn i1AiBiPn i1Ai2q Pn i1Bi2p ; where A and B are two independent vectors. Finally, we segregated the TCGA bulk expression pro les based on hierarchical clustering on the basis of the cosine similarity matrix. Group-speci c survival probabilities were estimated using the Kaplan Meier method. Notably, Kaplan Meier is a non-parametric estimator of survival probabilities based on patients longitudinal lifetime data68. Statistics and reproducibility . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Graphical illustrations are plotted with R Stats packages. The P-value cut-off used in this study is 0.05. *,**,***, and **** in the gures refer to P-values 0.05, 0.01, 0.001, and 0.0001, respectively. For comparison of the medians of the two distributions, the Mann Whitney U Test was performed, whereas the Shapiro Wilk test was used for the correlation. All the scripts, along with the raw data to reproduce every gure is provided in this link. ( https://github.com/the-ahuja-lab/CancerSmell/tree/master/Figures ). Reporting summary . Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The single-cell expression matrices (non-normalized) of malignant cells across multiple cancer cell lines and tumor samples were downloaded from CancerSea, a PanTumor single-cell RNAseq database ( http://biocc.hrbmu.edu.cn/CancerSEA/home.jsp )69. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes links enrichment of olfactory receptors with cancer cell differentiation status and prognosis', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Following are the accession ids of the datasets used in this study: GSE102130, GSE69405,GSE73121, GSE77308, GSE83142, GSE85534, GSE67980, GSE75367, GSE110499,GSE76312, GSE83533, GSE102130, GSE57872, GSE70630, GSE84465, GSE89567, GSE75688, GSE81861, E-MTAB-6149, GSE103322, GSE72056, GSE81383, GSE99330, GSE97681, GSE113660, DRP003981, GSE99305, E-MTAB-6142, GSE99795, DRP001358,GSE81812, GSE68596, GSE81861, GSE85534, GSE76312, GSE98734, GSE65525,ERP020478, GSE51254, GSE57872, GSE102130, GSE80297, GSE81861, DRP003337. Notably, datasets provided in the CancerSea include only those cells which were positive for cellular malignancy. We implemented CancerSmell on those datasets in which theminimum number of malignant single cells was at least 60. Notably, to recheck theauthenticity of the downloaded data, we have randomly downloaded a subset of raw les and reanalyzed, and found no discrepancies. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 1, 'content': ' International Journal of   Molecular Sciences Review Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol Jan Jakub k1,* and Esam E. El-Fakahany2,* /gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001 /gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046 Citation: Jakubk, J.; El-Fakahany, E.E. Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2021 ,22, 1953. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijms22041953 Academic Editor: Alexander O. Shpakov Received: 20 January 2021 Accepted: 12 February 2021 Published: 16 February 2021 Publishers Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afl- iations. Copyright:  2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 1, 'content': 'This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/).1Department of Neurochemistry, Institute of Physiology Czech Academy of Sciences, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic 2Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA *Correspondence: jan.jakubik@fgu.cas.cz (J.J.); elfak001@umn.edu (E.E.E.-F.) Abstract: G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are membrane proteins that convey extracellular signals to the cellular milieu. They represent a target for more than 30% of currently marketed drugs. Here we review the effects of membrane cholesterol on the function of GPCRs of Class A. We review both the specic effects of cholesterol mediated via its direct high-afnity binding to the receptor and non-specic effects mediated by cholesterol-induced changes in the properties of the membrane. Cholesterol binds to many GPCRs at both canonical and non-canonical binding sites. It allosterically affects ligand binding to and activation of GPCRs. Additionally, it changes the oligomerization state of GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 1, 'content': 'In this review, we consider a perspective of the potential for the development of new therapies that are targeted at manipulating the level of membrane cholesterol or modulating cholesterol binding sites on to GPCRs. Keywords: GPCRs; cholesterol; allosteric modulation 1. Introduction G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are membrane proteins that pass on extracellular signals to the cell using heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins). GPCRs are integral membrane proteins that possess seven transmembrane \x0b-helices (denoted TM1 to TM7) connected with three intracellular (IL1 to IL3) and three extracellular (EL1 to EL3) loops (Figure 1A). The cysteine in the middle of ECL2 forms disulde bridge with cysteine at the edge of TM3. The N-terminus of GPCR is oriented out of the cell and may be glycosylated at asparagine or glutamine residues. The C-terminus is oriented to the cytoplasm and may be palmitoylated or myristoylated at cysteine residues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Individual amphiphilic TMs form a circular bundle with a hydrophilic pocket among them that is accessible from the extracellular side (Figure 1B). The pocket serves as an orthosteric site for endogenous transmitter or hormone. More than 30% of currently marketed drugs act at GPCRs and thus GPCRs represent a very important pharmacological target [1]. Most of neurotransmitters act at several receptor subtypes of a given receptor family. This divergence allows one signalling molecule to elicit different cellular responses depend- ing on the distribution of the receptor subtypes in the body. For a pharmacological agent to target body organs selectively, it has to be able to differentially inuence the activation of individual receptor subtypes. In general, the binding site for a given endogenous signalling molecule is conserved among its receptor subtypes. This is necessary for accommodating the signalling molecule during the evolution of receptor subtypes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 1, 'content': 'The sameness of the orthosteric site, however, makes nding subtype-selective compounds acting at the orthos- teric binding site extremely difcult. In contrast to orthosteric sites, secondary allosteric binding sites on receptors are not under such evolutionary pressure and vary among subtypes [ 2]. Therefore, a lot of effort was given to the research of allosteric binding sites and allosteric modulators. A large number of various allosteric modulators of GPCRs that bind to the extracellular or intracellular domains were identied. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 2 of 18 Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  2 of 19       Figure 1. (A), a schematic representation of structural features of G-protein coupled receptors  (GPCRs) of class A; ( B) 3D representation of GPCR of cl ass A. Yellowthe orthosteric binding  site; goldcholesterol dimer bound to cholesterol consensus motif (CCM); purplepalmitic acid covalently bound to cysteine in Helix 8.  Most of neurotransmitters act at several rece ptor subtypes of a given receptor family.  This divergence allows one signalling molecule to elicit different cellular responses de- pending on the distribution of the receptor subtypes in the body. For a pharmacological  agent to target body organs selectively, it ha s to be able to differentially influence the ac- tivation of individual receptor subtypes. In general, the binding site for a given endoge- nous signalling molecule is conserved among it s receptor subtypes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 2, 'content': 'This is necessary for  accommodating the signalling molecule during  the evolution of receptor subtypes. The  sameness of the orthosteric site, however,  makes finding subtype-selective compounds  acting at the orthosteric binding site extremely difficult. In contrast to orthosteric sites,  secondary allosteric binding sites on receptors are not under such evolutionary pressure  and vary among subtypes [2]. Th erefore, a lot of effort was given to the research of allo- steric binding sites and allosteric modulators . A large number of various allosteric modu- lators of GPCRs that bind to the extracellu lar or intracellular domains were identified.  Cholesterol (CLR) is a sterol-like type of lipid. CLR composes about 30% of all animal  cell membranes. The primary function of CLR is structural. It regulates membrane fluid- ity. Other non-structural functions of CLR include its physical interaction with many  membrane proteins including GPCRs (Figure 1B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 2, 'content': 'This interaction results in alteration of  receptor properties in terms of the processes of ligand binding, receptor activation and  signal transduction [3,4]. Thus, membrane CLR can be considered an allosteric modulator of GPCRs possessing its own specific allosteric binding site.  The family of GPCRs is a large group of ev olutionarily-related proteins divided into  six classes (termed A to F) that substantially di ffer in their structure. In this review, there- fore, we will focus on class A of GPCRs, al so known as rhodopsin-like class. Class A  GPCRs includes receptors that govern key physiological processes whose malfunction is associated with various pathologies, e.g., the state of activation of serotonin, dopamine,  Figure 1. (A), a schematic representation of structural features of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) of class A; ( B) 3D representation of GPCR of class A. Yellowthe orthosteric binding site; goldcholesterol dimer bound to cholesterol consensus motif (CCM); purplepalmitic acid covalently bound to cysteine in Helix 8. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Cholesterol (CLR) is a sterol-like type of lipid. CLR composes about 30% of all animal cell membranes. The primary function of CLR is structural. It regulates membrane uidity. Other non-structural functions of CLR include its physical interaction with many membrane proteins including GPCRs (Figure 1B). This interaction results in alteration of receptor properties in terms of the processes of ligand binding, receptor activation and signal transduction [ 3,4]. Thus, membrane CLR can be considered an allosteric modulator of GPCRs possessing its own specic allosteric binding site. The family of GPCRs is a large group of evolutionarily-related proteins divided into six classes (termed A to F) that substantially differ in their structure. In this review, therefore, we will focus on class A of GPCRs, also known as rhodopsin-like class. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Class A GPCRs includes receptors that govern key physiological processes whose malfunction is associated with various pathologies, e.g., the state of activation of serotonin, dopamine, and muscarinic receptors are involved in mood disorders, Parkinsons disease, and Alzheimers disease, respectively. We review the evidence that membrane CLR interacts with specic binding sites on GPCRs and allosterically modulates binding and action of orthosteric ligands, and receptor oligomerization and signalling. We also explore approaching pharmacologic modulation of membrane cholesterol and modulation of CLR-binding sites as potential therapeutic targets. 2. Chemical Properties of Membrane CLR CLR is a polycyclic and amphiphilic molecule that is found in high abundance in cell membranes. Its main function is regulation of membrane uidity by facilitation of the formation of ordered phases in the lipid bilayer via composite interactions between lipid components. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 3 of 18 Therefore, parts of the membrane close to CLR molecules are more rigid and thinner. Fluidity and thickness of the membrane, in turn, affect membrane protein trafcking. CLR has a at asymmetric structure dened by a planar \x0b-face and rough \x0c-face, named according to the nomenclature of ring compounds [ 5]. CLR in the membrane may exist as monomer or form dimers oriented \x0b-face to \x0b-face, the so-called face-to-face dimers, stabilized by Van der Waals contacts (Figure 2A) [ 6]. Face-to-face CLR dimers were found in X-ray crystal structures of membrane proteins. Another type of CLR dimer may be stabilized by a hydrogen bond between hydroxyl groups (Figure 2B). However, CLR hydroxyl group rather interacts via hydrogen bonding with other membrane lipids or proteins [ 7]. The third type of CLR dimers, trans-bilayer tail-to-tail dimer, has been hypothesized to exist in membranes (Figure 2C) [8]. Int. J. Mol. Sci. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': '2021 , 22, x  3 of 19     and muscarinic receptors are involved in m ood disorders, Parkinsons disease, and Alz- heimers disease, respectively. We review the evidence that membrane CLR interacts with  specific binding sites on GPCRs and allosterically modulates binding and action of or- thosteric ligands, and receptor  oligomerization and signalling. We also explore approach- ing pharmacologic modulation of membrane cholesterol and modulation of CLR-binding  sites as potential therapeutic targets.  2. Chemical Properties of Membrane CLR  CLR is a polycyclic and amphiphilic molecule that is found in high abundance in cell  membranes. Its main function is regulation of membrane fluidity by facilitation of the for- mation of ordered phases in the lipid bilaye r via composite interactions between lipid  components. CLR is a shorter and more rigid mo lecule in comparison with phospholipids.  Therefore, parts of the membrane close to CL R molecules are more rigid and thinner. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Flu- idity and thickness of the membrane, in turn, affect membrane protein trafficking.  CLR has a flat asymmetric structure defined by a planar -face and rough -face,  named according to the nomenclature of ring  compounds [5]. CLR in the membrane may  exist as monomer or form dimers oriented -face to -face, the so-called face-to-face di- mers, stabilized by Van der Waals contacts (Figure 2A) [6]. Face-to-face CLR dimers were found in X-ray crystal structures of membra ne proteins. Another ty pe of CLR dimer may  be stabilized by a hydrogen bond between hydroxyl groups (Figure 2B). However, CLR  hydroxyl group rather interacts via hydrog en bonding with other membrane lipids or  proteins [7]. The third type of CLR dimers, trans-bilayer tail-to-tail dimer, has been hy- pothesized to exist in membranes (Figure 2C) [8].    Figure 2. Cholesterol (CLR) dimers. Th ree types of CLR dimers: ( A), face-to-face dimer; ( B), dimer  stabilized by a hydrogen bo nd (yellow dashed line); ( C) tail-to-tail dimer.  3. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': 'General Mechanisms of Cholesterol Action at GPCRs  In principle, CLR may affect GPCRs in two ways. It may either directly bind to the  receptor and thus allosterically modulate the affinity of ligands, efficacy of agonists and  spontaneous activity of the receptor. Alternat ively, CLR may affect GPCRs indirectly by  changing fluidity and organization of the membrane that in turn affects signalling of  Figure 2. Cholesterol (CLR) dimers. Three types of CLR dimers: ( A), face-to-face dimer; ( B), dimer stabilized by a hydrogen bond (yellow dashed line); ( C) tail-to-tail dimer. 3. General Mechanisms of Cholesterol Action at GPCRs In principle, CLR may affect GPCRs in two ways. It may either directly bind to the receptor and thus allosterically modulate the afnity of ligands, efcacy of agonists and spontaneous activity of the receptor. Alternatively, CLR may affect GPCRs indirectly by changing uidity and organization of the membrane that in turn affects signalling of GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Direct modulation of GPCRs by CLR requires its interaction with specic sites on receptors with sufcient afnity. Such sites were identied in many GPCRs; see below. In contrast, the indirect mechanism does not involve CLR-specic binding site. As stated above, CLR decreases membrane uidity that slows down the diffusion of solute molecules like receptors, channels or membrane enzymes that in turn slows-down kinetics and decreases the efcacy of signal transmission from a given receptor to its effector. In membranes rich in CLR content, CLR has a propensity to associate into patches. High CLR content increases the order of neighbouring acyl chains that leads to increased bilayer thickness [ 9]. These membrane microdomains are termed lipid rafts and substantially affect signal transduction [ 10]. The hydrophobic mismatch is dened as the difference between the hydrophobic membrane thickness and the peripheral length of the hydrophobic part of the membrane-spanning protein [ 11]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 3, 'content': 'The membrane-perpendicular length of GPCRs is shorter in an inactive conformation than in an active conformation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 4 of 18 a thinner part of the membrane. Consequently, keeping a receptor in the non-raft region may constrain it in an inactive conformation [ 12]. Thus, keeping a receptor in non-raft region ablates its signalling. Moreover, the differential localization of proteins in various microdomains increases the specicity of signalling. Co-localization of several signalling pathways at a given microdomain, for example, may promote the formation of a signalling hub that enables integration of distinct signalling pathways at the receptor-membrane interface [ 13,14]. Thus, lipid rafts play a unique role in cell physiology and pathology and represent possible target in hematopoietic, inammatory, neurodegenerative, and infectious diseases [ 15]. Taken together, the indirect effects of membrane CLR are diverse and bring complexity to GPCR signalling. 4. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Binding of Cholesterol to GPCRs CLR was found co-crystallized with many GPCRs of class A suggesting possible specic binding. At the time of writing of this review, 44 X-ray or cryo-EM structures of 18 receptors of GPCRs of Class A have been published in the RCSB database (https: //www.rcsb.org/, accessed on 20 January 2021) (Table 1). CLR was found co-crystallized with receptors for structurally different agonists including biogenic amines like adrenaline (\x0b2C,\x0c2) or serotonin (5-HT 2B), peptides like angiotensin (AT 1), chemokines (CCR9, CXCR2, CXCR3), endomorphins ( \x14OR,\x16OR), endothelin (ETB), formyl peptide (FPR2) or oxytocin (OTR), purines like adenosine (A 2A) or ADP (P2Y 1, P2Y 12), endocannabinoids (CB 1, CB 2), and eicosanoids like leukotriene (CLT2). CLR in crystals appeared as monomer or dimer. For some receptors, CLR binding was conrmed in several crystal structures, e.g., \x0c2, 5- HT2B, or A 2A. On the other hand, for some receptors, X-ray structures provide contradictory results, e.g., AT 1, CXCR2 or ETB. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 4, 'content': 'It also should be noted that in some cases CLR was found in an unexpected orientation, for example, parallel to membrane (CB 2) or hydroxy group in the middle of membrane bilayer (CB 1). Additionally, no CLR was found in the crystal structures of GPCRs at which CLR was shown to have a profound effect on ligand binding or receptor activation; see below. Thus, information on the interaction of CLR with GPCRs inferred from crystal structures should be taken with caution. Further, cholesteryl hemisuccinate (CHS) that is used for solubilisation of biological membranes was found co-crystallized with GPCRs. CHS may compete out CLR from binding to GPCR. As it is not certain whether co-crystallized CHS indeed binds to the CLR-specic binding site on GPCRs or is the result of the solubilization process, CHS binding to GPCRs is not covered in this review. Several CLR sites can be distinguished (Table 1, Figure 3). A CLR dimer in the outer leaet of membrane binds to A 2A-adenosine receptor at a groove between TM2, TM3, and TM4 (Figure 3A) or TM6 (Figure 3C). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 4, 'content': 'A similar binding of CLR as in Figure 2A can be found at the P2Y 1receptor (4XNV) (Table 1). The \x14-opioid receptor in an active conformation (6PT2, 6B73), the \x16-opioid receptor at an active (5C1M) or inactive conformation (4DKL) and the CXCR3 receptor at an active conformation (5WB2) have CLR bound to the same site as the A 2A-adenosine receptor shown in Figure 3C. A CLR monomer in the outer leaet binds to the oxytocin receptor at TM4 and TM5 (Figure 3B) or to \x0b2C-adrenergic receptor at TM1 and TM7 (Figure 3D). A similar binding site as in Figure 3D has been identied at the endothelin receptor (5X93) and purinergic P2Y 12receptor (4NTK) (Table 1). A CLR dimer in the inner leaet of the membrane binds to the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor in a groove formed by TM2, TM3, and TM4 (Figure 3E). The same CLR-binding site is present at the CXC receptor 2 (6LFM), formyl peptide receptor 2 (6CW5, 6OMM) and P2Y 12purinergic receptor (4NTJ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 4, 'content': 'A CLR monomer in the inner leaet binds to TM6 of an inactive conformation of the\x14-opioid receptor (Figure 3F) or the CCR9 chemokine receptor ( Figure 3G ). A similar binding of CLR as in Figure 3G has been found at the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 2 (6RZ7) and formyl peptide receptor 2 (6CW5, 6OMM). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 5 of 18 Table 1. Cholesterol in crystal and cryo-EM structures. List of X-ray and cryo-EM (blue PDB codes) structures of Class A GPCRs containing cholesterol. Rec.receptor subtype, CodePDB ID code, G-prot.a subclass of G-proteins mediating the primary response, Conf.active or inactive conformation of the receptor, CLRmonomeric or dimeric state of CLR, Leaetlocation of CLR in the inner or outer leaet of the membrane, TMtransmembrane helices CLR is interacting with, Ref.reference. Rec. CodeG- prot.Conf. CLR Leaet TM Notes Ref. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 5, 'content': '\x0b2C 6KUW G i Inactive Monomer Out 1, 7cholesterol is a part of the protomer-protomer interfaceTBP \x0c2 2RH1 Gs InactiveDimer In 2, 3, 4[16] Monomer In 1, 8 \x0c2 3D4S G s Inactive Dimer In 2, 3, 4 [17] \x0c2 6PS0 G s Inactive Monomer In 2, 3, 4 6PS2, 6PS3, 6PS4, 6PS5, 6PS7 same [18] \x14OR 6PT2 G i Active Monomer Out 6 only with one protomer [19] \x14OR 6B73 G i Active Monomer Out 6 [20] \x14OR 6VI4 G i Inactive Monomer In 4, 5 only with one protomer [20] \x16OR 4DKL G i Inactive Monomer Out 6 [21] \x16OR 5C1M G i Active Monomer Out 6 [22] 5-HT 2B 4IB4 G q Active Monomer In 1, 8 [23] 5-HT 2B 5TVN G q Active Monomer In 1, 8 [24] 5-HT 2B 6DRX G q Active Monomer In 1, 8 6DRY, 6DRZ, 6DS0 same [25] A2A 4EIY Gs InactiveDimer Out 6 [26]Monomer Out 2, 3, 4 A2A 5IU4 Gs InactiveDimer Out 6 5UI7, 5UI8, 5UIA and 5UIB same [27]Dimer Out 2, 3, 4 5UIB only monomer. AT1 6OS1 G q Active Monomer In 1, 8 6OS0 and 6OD1 no cholesterol [28] CB1 6N4B G i ActiveMonomer In 3, 4 [29]Monomer In 3, 4unexpected orientation with OH in the middle of the membrane CB2 6PT0 Gi ActiveDimer Out 6 [30] Monomer In 5, 6 parallel to membrane Monomer In 3, 4 parallel to membrane CCR9 5LWE Inactive Monomer In 6 [31] CLT2 6RZ7 G q Inactive Monomer In 6 6RZ6, 6RZ9 dtto. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 5, 'content': '[32] CXCR2 6LFM G i Active Monomer In 2, 3, 4 6LFO ditto, 6LFL no cholesterol [33] CXCR3 5WB2 G i Active Dimer Out 6 [34] ETB 5X93 G q Inactive Monomer Out 1, 7 5XPR no cholesterol [35] FPR2 6LW5 Gi ActiveMonomer In 6 [36] Monomer In 2, 3, 4 FPR2 6OMM Gi ActiveDimer Out 1, 2 [37]Monomer Out 6 Monomer In 6 Monomer In 3, 4, 5 OTR 6TPK G q Inactive Monomer Out 4, 5 [38] P2Y 12 4NTJ G i InactiveMonomer Out 1, 7 [39]Monomer In 3, 4unexpected orientation, binding to Y in DRY motif P2Y 12 4PXZ G i Inactive Monomer In 2, 3, 4 [39] P2Y 1 4XNV G q Inactive Monomer Out 2, 3, 4 [40]', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 6 of 18 Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  6 of 19     same site as the A 2A-adenosine receptor shown in Figure 3C. A CLR monomer in the outer  leaflet binds to the oxytocin receptor at TM4 and TM5 (Figure 3B) or to 2C-adrenergic  receptor at TM1 and TM7 (Figure 3D). A similar binding site as in Figure 3D has been  identified at the endothelin receptor (5X93) and purinergic P2Y 12 receptor (4NTK) (Table  1). A CLR dimer in the inner leaflet of the membrane binds to the 2-adrenergic receptor  in a groove formed by TM2, TM3, and TM4 (Figure 3E). The same CLR-binding site is  present at the CXC receptor 2 (6LFM), form yl peptide receptor 2 (6CW5, 6OMM) and  P2Y 12 purinergic receptor (4NTJ). A CLR monomer in the inner leaflet binds to TM6 of an  inactive conformation of the -opioid receptor (Figure 3F) or the CCR9 chemokine recep- tor (Figure 3G). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': 'A similar binding of CLR as in Figure 3G has been found at the cysteinyl  leukotriene receptor 2 (6RZ7) and formyl pe ptide receptor 2 (6CW5, 6OMM). A special  kind of CLR interaction at TM1 stabilized by palmitic acid covalently bound to cysteine in helix 8 can be found at the 5-HT 2B receptor (Figure 3H) and also at the 2-adrenergic  receptor (2RH1) and angiotensin receptor 1 (6OS1).    Figure 3. CLR binding sites. Orientationextracellular side up, N-terminusred, C-terminus  blue, cholesterolgold, palmitic acidpurple. ( A), CLR dimer binding to A 2A-adenosine receptor  (5IU4) at TM2, TM3 and TM4. ( B), CLR monomer binding to oxytocin receptor (6TPK) at TM4 and  TM5. ( C) CLR dimer binding to the A 2A-adenosine receptor (5IU4) at TM6. ( D), CLR monomer  binding to 2C adrenergic receptor (6KUW) at TM1 and TM7. ( E) CLR dimer binding to the 2 ad- renergic receptor (3D4S) at TM2, TM3, and TM4. ( F), CLR monomer binding to the -opioid recep- tor (6VI4) at TM4 and TM5. ( G), CLR monomer binding to the CCR9 chemokine receptor (5LWE)  at TM6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': '( H), CLR monomer binding to the 5-HT 2B receptor (4IB4) at TM1 and helix 8.  Receptors found co-crystallized with CLR mediate their primary functional re- sponses via all three major subclasses of G-proteins: G i, G s, and G q. None of the CLR- binding sites can be considered typical for a given receptor coupling pathway, suggesting  that CLR-binding sites evolved independently fr om receptor coupling . Similarly, compar- ison of GPCRs in active and inactive conformations does not show any correlation with CLR binding. This suggests the absence of a common mechanism of CLR action on recep- tor activation.  Based on X-ray structures two putative ch olesterol-binding motifs were postulated.  Besides the so-called CLR recognition amin o acid consensus (CRAC) domain common  Figure 3. CLR binding sites. Orientationextracellular side up, N-terminusred, C-terminus blue, cholesterolgold, palmitic acidpurple. ( A), CLR dimer binding to A 2A-adenosine receptor (5IU4) at TM2, TM3 and TM4. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': '( B), CLR monomer binding to oxytocin receptor (6TPK) at TM4 and TM5. ( C) CLR dimer binding to the A 2A-adenosine receptor (5IU4) at TM6. ( D), CLR monomer binding to \x0b2Cadrenergic receptor (6KUW) at TM1 and TM7. ( E) CLR dimer binding to the \x0c2 adrenergic receptor (3D4S) at TM2, TM3, and TM4. ( F), CLR monomer binding to the \x14-opioid receptor (6VI4) at TM4 and TM5. ( G), CLR monomer binding to the CCR9 chemokine receptor (5LWE) at TM6. ( H), CLR monomer binding to the 5-HT 2Breceptor (4IB4) at TM1 and helix 8. Receptors found co-crystallized with CLR mediate their primary functional responses via all three major subclasses of G-proteins: G i, Gs, and G q. None of the CLR-binding sites can be considered typical for a given receptor coupling pathway, suggesting that CLR-binding sites evolved independently from receptor coupling. Similarly, comparison of GPCRs in active and inactive conformations does not show any correlation with CLR binding. This suggests the absence of a common mechanism of CLR action on receptor activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Based on X-ray structures two putative cholesterol-binding motifs were postulated. Besides the so-called CLR recognition amino acid consensus (CRAC) domain common for all membrane proteins [ 41], the so-called CLR Consensus Motif (CCM) was identied in the structure of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor (3D4S) [ 17]. CCM is the groove formed by 2 or 3 TMs. For the 3D4S structure, residues R151, L155 W158 in the TM4 and Y70 in the TM2 were identied as key CLR-binding residues (Figure 4). Although the orientation of the CLR dimer in the 2RH1 structure is slightly different from the 3D4S structure, key interactions with CCM are preserved [ 16]. The same applies to binding of the monomeric CLR in the 6PS0 structure [ 18]. In contrast, no CLR was found in four structures of the \x0c2-receptor: 2R4R, 2R4S, 3KJ6, 3P0G. Based on bioinformatics studies of GPCR homology, the consensus sequence of CCM has been established as R/K-X 5-I/V/L-X 5-Y/W in the one helix and F/Y in the opposing helix. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Residues R/K and F/Y of CCM are at the intracellular edge of TM helices. Residues Y/W are approximately in the middle of the membrane. The hydroxyl group of CLR interacts with a basic residue of CCM that are abundant at the intracellular edge of TMs. The \x0c-face of the CLR dimer binds strongly with W or Y via hydrophobic, mainly \x19-\x19stacking, interactions. The CRAC domain (R/K-X 5-Y-X 5-L/V) and its reversed CARC (L/V-X 5-Y-X 5-R/K) are similar to the CCM in having R or K at the edge of the membrane. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 7 of 18 swapped in CRAC and CARC. While CRAC and CARC accommodate monomeric CLR, the CCM may bind a CLR dimer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  7 of 19     for all membrane proteins [41], the so-called CLR Consensus Motif (CCM) was identified  in the structure of the 2-adrenergic receptor (3D4S) [17]. CCM is the groove formed by 2  or 3 TMs. For the 3D4S structure, residues R151, L155 W158 in the TM4 and Y70 in the  TM2 were identified as key CLR-binding residues (Figure 4). Although the orientation of the CLR dimer in the 2RH1 structure is slight ly different from the 3D4S structure, key  interactions with CCM are preserved [16]. Th e same applies to binding of the monomeric  CLR in the 6PS0 structure [18]. In contrast, no CLR was found in four structures of the  2- receptor: 2R4R, 2R4S, 3KJ6, 3P0G. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Based on bioinformatics studies of GPCR homology,  the consensus sequence of CCM has been established as R/K-X 5-I/V/L-X 5-Y/W in the one  helix and F/Y in the opposing helix. Residues  R/K and F/Y of CCM are at the intracellular  edge of TM helices. Residues Y/W are approximately in the middle of the membrane. The  hydroxyl group of CLR interacts with a basi c residue of CCM that are abundant at the  intracellular edge of TMs. The -face of the CLR dimer binds strongly with W or Y via  hydrophobic, mainly - stacking, interactions. The CRAC domain (R/K-X 5-Y-X 5-L/V)  and its reversed CARC (L/V-X 5-Y-X 5-R/K) are similar to the CCM in having R or K at the  edge of the membrane. In comparison to CCM, positions of aromatic and hydrophobic  residues are swapped in CRAC and CARC. While CRAC and CARC accommodate mon-omeric CLR, the CCM may bind a CLR dimer.    Figure 4. Structure of cholesterol consensus motif (CCM). CCM in the structure of 2-adrenergic  receptor (3D4S) as viewed with TM2 ( A) or TM4 ( B) in front. Orientation, extracellular side up.  Principal residues of CCM are coloured. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Gr eenY70 in TM2, blue R151, yellowW158 and  pinkI154 in TM4.  Although CCM, CRAC, and CARC motifs appear in the sequence of large number  GPCRs [17,42], CLR was found in structures lacking a CLR-binding motif, e.g., canna- binoid CB 2 receptor (6PT0) or endothelin receptor (5X93) (Table 2). Binding of CLR to a  detected CLR-binding motif was confirmed only in some of the published structures. For  example, CCM was found at all five subtypes of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor.  However, no CLR was detected at any of the 16  published structures. In structures of the  M1 receptor (5CXV and 6WJC), CHS is bound to CCM [43,44]. In many structures pos- sessing a CLR-binding motif, CLR-binding was detected somewhere else. One of the  abundant non-canonical CLR-binding sites is in the inner leaflet of the membrane at TM1 and Helix 8, e.g., structures 2RH1 (  2-adrenergic); 4IB4, 5TVN, and 6DRX (5-HT 2B); and  6OS1 (AT 1). The binding of CLR in this site is stabilized by palmitic acid covalently bound  Figure 4. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Structure of cholesterol consensus motif (CCM). CCM in the structure of \x0c2-adrenergic receptor (3D4S) as viewed with TM2 ( A) or TM4 ( B) in front. Orientation, extracellular side up. Principal residues of CCM are coloured. GreenY70 in TM2, blue R151, yellowW158 and pink I154 in TM4. Although CCM, CRAC, and CARC motifs appear in the sequence of large number GPCRs [ 17,42], CLR was found in structures lacking a CLR-binding motif, e.g., cannabinoid CB2receptor (6PT0) or endothelin receptor (5X93) (Table 2). Binding of CLR to a detected CLR-binding motif was conrmed only in some of the published structures. For example, CCM was found at all ve subtypes of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. However, no CLR was detected at any of the 16 published structures. In structures of the M 1 receptor (5CXV and 6WJC), CHS is bound to CCM [ 43,44]. In many structures possessing a CLR-binding motif, CLR-binding was detected somewhere else. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'One of the abundant non-canonical CLR-binding sites is in the inner leaet of the membrane at TM1 and Helix 8, e.g., structures 2RH1 ( \x0c2-adrenergic); 4IB4, 5TVN, and 6DRX (5-HT 2B); and 6OS1 (AT 1). The binding of CLR in this site is stabilized by palmitic acid covalently bound to the cysteine in Helix 8. Another non-canonical CLR-binding site appears in the outer leaet of the membrane at TM6, e.g., structures 6PT2 ( \x0e-opioid); 6B73 ( \x14-opioid); 4EIY and 5IU4 (A2A-adenosine). At structures 4DLK and 5C1M of the \x16-opioid receptor, CLR binds to the variation of CCM. In these structures, the CLR hydroxyl group makes a hydrogen bond with Q314 instead of basic R or K of classic CCM. At structure 6LFM of the CXCR2 receptor, CLR binds to the variation of CRAC that possesses W instead of Y. Besides X-ray crystallography, approaches of computational chemistry also predicted interaction of CLR with GPCRs at many sites [ 4,45,46]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Multi-scale simulations of molecular dynamics revealed that CLR-interaction sites are dynamic in nature and are indicative of high occupancy sites rather than binding sites. The results suggest that the energy landscape of CLR association with GPCRs corresponds to a series of shallow minima separated by low barriers. However, extensive all-atom simulations of molecular dynamics of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor (3D4S) suggest that CLR interacts specically with the CCM and its binding is stable over the course of simulation [ 17]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 8 of 18 Table 2. Cholesterol binding motifs and residues interacting with CLR. List of X-ray structures of Class A GPCRs containing cholesterol predicted CLR-binding motifs and CLR-interacting residues. CodePDB ID code, CLRmonomeric or dimeric state of CLR, leaetlocation of CLR in the inner or outer leaet of the membrane, TMtransmembrane helices CLR is interacting with. Rec. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Code CLR Leaet TM Predicted Conrmed? CLR-Interacting Residues \x0b2C 6KUW Monomer Out 1, 7 CCM No Q45, Y46, E112, K420 \x0c2 2RH1Dimer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158 Monomer In 1, 8 T56, C341_Plm \x0c2 3D4S Dimer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158 \x0c2 6PS0 Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158, F166 \x14OR 6PT2 Monomer Out 6 CCM No F280, D293 (o2) \x14OR 6B73 Monomer Out 6 CCM No T288, F293, T302, S303, S311 \x14OR 6VI4 Monomer In 4, 5 CCM No F147, T150, Y157, H162 \x16OR 4DKL Monomer Out 6 CCM Q Yes T294, Y299, F313, Q314, S317 \x16OR 5C1M Monomer Out 6 CCM Q Yes T294, Y299, F313, Q314, S317 5-HT 2B 4IB4 Monomer In 1, 8 CCM No T73, Y394, Y399, C397_Plm 5-HT 2B 5TVN Monomer In 1, 8 CCM No T73, Y394, Y399 5-HT 2B 6DRX Monomer In 1, 8 CCM No T73, Y394, Y399 A2A 4EIYDimer Out 6 F182, 183, 255, 258, S263, H264 Monomer Out 2, 3, 4 CCM No F70, F79, Q163 (o2) A2A5IU4 Dimer Out 6 F182, 183, 255, 258, S263, H264 Dimer Out 2, 3, 4 CCM No F70, H75, F79, F133, Q163 AT1 6OS1 Monomer In 1, 8 CCM No F39, F44, S47 CB1 6N4BMonomer In 3, 4 CRAC Partly F208, K232 Monomer In 3, 4 F208, Y215, H219, R220 CB2 6PT0Dimer Out 6 None  Q276, K279, F283 Monomer In 6Y207, H211, W214, H217, R238, D240 Monomer In 3, 4 D130, Y137, T153, R149 CCR9 5LWE Monomer In 6 CCM Yes K254, T258, F263, F308, F319 CLT2 6RZ7 Monomer In 5 CARC Yes S218, Y221, R226, F257 CXCR2 6LFM Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CRAC W Yes N89, N129, K163, W170, L174 CXCR3 5WB2 Dimer Out 6 CCM Yes T247, F265, S268, R271, T276 ETB 5X93 Monomer Out 1 None  Y102, T105 FPR2 6LW5Monomer In 6 S215 Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CRAC No N66, W15', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Code CLR Leaet TM Predicted Conrmed? CLR-Interacting Residues \x0b2C 6KUW Monomer Out 1, 7 CCM No Q45, Y46, E112, K420 \x0c2 2RH1Dimer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158 Monomer In 1, 8 T56, C341_Plm \x0c2 3D4S Dimer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158 \x0c2 6PS0 Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CCM Yes Y70, T73, S74, R151, W158, F166 \x14OR 6PT2 Monomer Out 6 CCM No F280, D293 (o2) \x14OR 6B73 Monomer Out 6 CCM No T288, F293, T302, S303, S311 \x14OR 6VI4 Monomer In 4, 5 CCM No F147, T150, Y157, H162 \x16OR 4DKL Monomer Out 6 CCM Q Yes T294, Y299, F313, Q314, S317 \x16OR 5C1M Monomer Out 6 CCM Q Yes T2940 FPR2 6OMMDimer Out 1, 2  F37, Monomer Out 6 F206, F255, W267 Monomer In 6 H229 Monomer In 3, 4, 5 CRAC No F118, H129, W132 OTR 6TPK Monomer Out 4, 5 CCM No F191, W195, Y200, W203 P2Y 12 4NTJMonomer Out 1, 7 F28, Y278, S282, W285 Monomer In 3, 4 CCM No Y123, Q124 P2Y 12 4PXZ Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CCM YesF51, S55, K64, N65, F106, K142, W149, F153 P2Y 1 4XNV Monomer In 2, 3, 4 CCM No Y189, T221, Y217, S213', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 9 of 18 The structures of the A 2Aadenosine receptor 4EIY and 5UI4 contain three and four CLR molecules, respectively, that are bound at two nearly opposite positions at the ex- tracellular side of the receptor (Figure 3A,C) [ 26,27]. However, none of them interacts with CCM detected at the intracellular half of TM2 and TM4. Simulation of molecular dynamics of the system containing the A 2A-adenosine receptor in lipid bilayer containing 30 % of CLR resulted in the association of CLR with CCM and stabilization of TM6 by the CLR dimer [ 26,48]. The same approach identied additional CLR binding sites on the A 2A receptor [49]. Two molecules of CLR were successfully docked to the site at the intracellular half of TM6 of the M 1muscarinic receptor (5CXV) identied by site-directed mutagenesis (Figure 5 ) [50]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Simulation of molecular dynamics of the docked CLR conrmed the stability of CLR binding and identied the hydrogen bond to R365 (R6.35 according to Ballesteros-Weinstein numbering [51]) as the key interaction. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  9 of 19     molecular dynamics revealed that CLR-interaction sites are dynamic in nature and are  indicative of high occupancy sites rather than  binding sites. The re sults suggest that the  energy landscape of CLR association with GPCR s corresponds to a series of shallow min- ima separated by low barriers. However, extensive all-atom simulations of molecular dy-namics of the  2-adrenergic receptor (3D4S) suggest th at CLR interacts specifically with  the CCM and its binding is stable over the co urse of simulation [17]. CLR binding to the  CCM of the 2-adrenergic receptor requires a slow, concerted rearrangement of side  chains [47].  The structures of the A 2A adenosine receptor 4EIY and 5UI4 contain three and four  CLR molecules, respectively, that are bound at  two nearly opposite positions at the extra- cellular side of the receptor (Figure 3A and 3C) [26,27]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'However, none of them interacts  with CCM detected at the intracellular half of TM2 and TM4. Simulation of molecular  dynamics of the system containing the A 2A-adenosine receptor in lipid bilayer containing  30 % of CLR resulted in the association of CLR with CCM and stabilization of TM6 by the  CLR dimer [26,48]. The same approach identi fied additional CLR binding sites on the A 2A  receptor [49].  Two molecules of CLR were successfully docked to the site at the intracellular half of  TM6 of the M 1 muscarinic receptor (5CXV) identified by site-directed mutagenesis (Figure  5) [50]. Simulation of molecu lar dynamics of the docked CL R confirmed the stability of  CLR binding and identified the hydrogen bond to R365 (R6.35 according to Ballesteros- Weinstein numbering [51]) as the key interaction.    Figure 5. Docking of CLR to 5CXV structure of M 1 muscarinic receptor. Two molecules of CLR  docked to the structure of M 1 muscarinic receptor (5CXV) as viewed with TM6 ( A) or TM4 ( B) in  front. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Orientation, extracellular side up. Princi pal residues in TM6 interacting with CLR are col- oured. BlueR365, orangeL372, pinkL376.  5. Effects of CLR on Ligand Binding  Ligand binding to GPCRs ca n be modulated by CLR in two ways: i) CLR alters mem- brane fluidity that in turn affects the conformation of the receptor and its affinity for a  given ligand or ii) CLR specifically binds to the receptor and allosterically changes ligand  affinity. From a pharmacological point of view, CLR specific binding and allosteric recep-tor modulation are more relevant than CLR effe cts on membrane fluidity, as they offer the  possibility of selective modulation of individual GPCRs.  Thermostability and NMR studies of the  2-adrenergic receptor suggested specific  CLR binding with affinity as high as 1 nM [52]. CLR bound to GPCR may modulate it at  several levels. It may affect ligand binding, receptor function, or receptor oligomerization.  Figure 5. Docking of CLR to 5CXV structure of M 1muscarinic receptor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Two molecules of CLR docked to the structure of M 1muscarinic receptor (5CXV) as viewed with TM6 ( A) or TM4 ( B) in front. Orientation, extracellular side up. Principal residues in TM6 interacting with CLR are coloured. BlueR365, orangeL372, pinkL376. 5. Effects of CLR on Ligand Binding Ligand binding to GPCRs can be modulated by CLR in two ways: (i) CLR alters membrane uidity that in turn affects the conformation of the receptor and its afnity for a given ligand or (ii) CLR specically binds to the receptor and allosterically changes ligand afnity. From a pharmacological point of view, CLR specic binding and allosteric receptor modulation are more relevant than CLR effects on membrane uidity, as they offer the possibility of selective modulation of individual GPCRs. Thermostability and NMR studies of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor suggested specic CLR binding with afnity as high as 1 nM [ 52]. CLR bound to GPCR may modulate it at several levels. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 9, 'content': 'It may affect ligand binding, receptor function, or receptor oligomerization. The human variant of the oxytocin receptor (OTR) expressed in Sf9 cells that are naturally lean in CLR has low afnity for oxytocin. Oxytocin high-afnity binding appears and increases with an increase in the content of membrane CLR [ 53]. Thus, in the case of OTR, oxytocin exerts positive cooperativity with CLR. According to the crystal structure, membrane CLR binds at the outer leaet of the membrane at TM4 and 5 (Table 1) that is in the vicinity of the orthosteric site. This may explain the profound effects of CLR on oxytocin binding. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 10 of 18 G-protein coupling. Replenishment of solubilized membranes with CLR enhances specic binding of the agonists and receptor G-protein coupling [ 54]. Thus, similarly to OTR, CLR exerts positive cooperativity with tested agonists at the 5-HT 1Areceptor. Further studies have shown that only one of two enantiomers of CLR, ent-cholesterol, supports the function of the 5-HT 1Areceptor like membrane CLR [55]. Membrane CLR impairs chemokine binding to CCR5 receptors [ 56] but increases chemokine binding to CXCR4 receptors [ 57]. No CLR was found co-crystallized with CCR5 or CXCR4. Elevated brain cholesterol impairs the afnity of cannabinoids for CB 1 receptor [ 58]. CLR was found to bind in the inner leaet of the membrane to TM3 and TM4 of the CB 1receptor in an active conformation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 10, 'content': 'The location of the CLR-binding site on the CB1receptor is close to the activation switch, suggesting that CLR may impair the afnity of CB 1agonists indirectly by modulation of receptor activation. Two CLR dimers are identied in the crystal structure of the A 2A-adenosine receptor (Table 1). One of them binds in the outer leaet of the membrane at TM6 that is in a vicinity of the orthosteric binding site. In contrast to OTR, the depletion of membrane cholesterol did not affect ligand binding to the A 2A-adenosine receptor [ 48]. In contrast, binding of the A 2A-adenosine receptor antagonist [3H]ZM241385 was partially decreased by 3 mM water-soluble CLR [ 59]. Based on replica exchange molecular dynamics, the authors suggest that water-soluble CLR gains access to the orthosteric binding site and decreases antagonist binding competitively. Modulation of ligand binding to muscarinic receptors by CLR varies among subtypes. CLR was not found at any of 16 crystal structures published so far. A possible CLR- binding site was predicted in the inner leaet of the membrane at TM6 using site-directed mutagenesis [ 50]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 10, 'content': 'This site seems to have a greater impact on the activation of muscarinic receptors than ligand binding. CLR depletion lowered the afnity of the antagonist N- methylscopolamine (NMS) to M 1, M2, and M 3subtypes [ 60,61]. Enrichment of membranes with CLR led to an increase in afnity for NMS at M 2but decrease at M 1and M 3receptors. The effects of CLR on afnity for the agonist carbachol were opposite to those on the afnity of NMS. The profound effects of CLR on ligand binding may be mediated by a CLR-binding site different from the one identied at TM6. In contrast to \x14- and \x16-opioid receptors, no CLR was found co-crystallized with \x0e-opioid receptors. At \x0e-opioid receptors, effects of CLR on ligand binding are rather mediated by alteration of receptor oligomerization state, see below. Thus, the nal effect of CLR on ligand binding differs in CLR-rich and CLR-lean membranes [62]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Taken together the effects of CLR on ligand binding to GPCRs cannot be generalized as there is no correlation between CLR effects and location or structure (binding motif) of the CLR-binding site on the receptor. This variability provides a chance for the development of selective allosteric modulators based on the CLR scaffold targeting the CLR-binding site at the receptor of interest. 6. Effects of CLR on the Functional Response of GPCRs GPCRs are highly dynamic membrane proteins adopting various ligand-specic conformations [ 63]. NMR of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor revealed that an agonist alone was not able to stabilize an active receptor conformation [ 64]. Thus, allosteric ligands are expected to profoundly affect the functional response of GPCRs to agonists. CLR may serve as such allosteric modulator. The functional response of GPCRs to their respective agonists may be modulated by CLR in two ways: (i) CLR affects membrane uidity and in turn, allosteric changes in receptor structure leading to receptor activation or (ii) CLR specically binds to the receptor and allosterically changes agonist afnity and operational efcacy [ 65]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Two pools of CLR were identied in simulations of molecular dynamics (i) an outer (annular) shell of CLR rapidly associating with and dissociating from the receptor, and an inner pool of tightly bound (non-annular) CLR molecules [ 66]. In general, both CLR pools may restrict the ability of the receptor to attain certain conformations. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 11 of 18 of the receptor. This is in contrast to the case of ligand binding, where specic high-afnity binding of CLR is more important than the effects of CLR on membrane properties. General mechanism of GPCR activation by agonists starts by binding of an agonist to the receptor in an inactive conformation. Agonists binding elicits changes in molecular switches (transmission switch in TM6 and tyrosine toggle switch in TM7) that propagate change in conformation from the orthosteric binding site to the ionic lock switch at the intracellular edge of TM3 [ 67]. Agonist induced changes in the ionic-lock switch lead to disruption of the ionic lock between R3.50 and D/E3.49 in the TM3, or in some cases E6.30 in the TM6, that prevents interaction of R3.50 with cysteine in the C-terminus of the\x0b-subunit of G-protein [ 68]. The rearrangement of molecular switches allows for the relative movement of TM3 and TM6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Due to the proline kink in the middle of TM6 (P6.50), its rotation leads to increase in the distance between intracellular edges of TM3 and TM6 and opening receptor G-protein interface for insertion of the C-terminus of the G-protein \x0b-subunit [ 69]. Findings of CLR co-crystallized close to R3.50 (e.g., 2RH1, 3D4S), E.30 (e.g., 5LWE), or transmission switch (e.g., 4EIY) suggest that CLR may specically modulate receptor activation 1. The observed effects of CLR on receptor activation vary among receptors. Comparison of the effects of various sterols on membrane uidity (assessed by uorescence anisotropy) and on the functional response of OTR to oxytocin and CCKR to CCK8 has shown that CLR modulates these receptors employing both possible mechanisms of CLR action [ 70]. Depletion of membrane cholesterol also attenuated signalling at the 5-HT 1Aand A 2A receptors [ 48]. Similarly, removal of membrane cholesterol reduced cAMP signalling of the \x16-opioid receptor [ 71]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 11, 'content': 'However, removal of membrane CLR did not affect signalling of the\x0e-opioid receptor. A possibility of allosteric modulation of protein function by CLR hydroxy group or even direct interaction with the ionic lock stabilizing the active state of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor was postulated [ 72]. However, in contrast to OTR, the A 2A-adenosine, 5-HT 1A and\x16-opioid receptor, CLR attenuates signalling of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor mainly by separation the receptor from its signalling partners [ 73,74]. In accordance, extensive atomistic simulations of molecular dynamics of 3D4S structure revealed that CLR makes the\x0c2-adrenergic receptor less exible so that it can only adopt certain conformations [ 75]. In these simulations, the effects of CLR on the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor activation were due to direct binding of CLR to the receptor. The effects of membrane CLR on signalling vary among muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 11, 'content': 'At M 2muscarinic receptors, CLR depletion led to an increase in prefer- ential signalling (G i-mediated inhibition of cAMP synthesis) as well as non-preferential signalling (G s-mediated activation of cAMP synthesis) [ 60]. Enrichment of the membranes with CLR led to a slight attenuation of both preferential and non-preferential signalling. Effects of high CLR content on non-preferential signalling were more eminent after inacti- vation of G iG-proteins by pertussis toxin. At M 1and M 3receptors, CLR had similar effects on non-preferential signalling (G s-mediated activation of cAMP synthesis), suggesting that an increase in membrane uidity facilitates signalling via adenylate cyclase [ 61]. In contrast, increase as well as a decrease in membrane CLR attenuated preferential signalling (Gq-mediated stimulation of IP Xsynthesis) at M 1and M 3receptors. Besides the effects of membrane uidity on the signalling of muscarinic receptors, CLR was shown to specically bind to muscarinic receptors and modulate their activation [ 50]. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that CLR binds to the site at TM6 (R/Q6.35 and L/I6.46). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 11, 'content': 'From this site, CLR prevents persistent activation of the M 5receptor by wash-resistant xanomeline. 7. Effects of CLR on Oligomerization of GPCRs In contrast to class C, GPCRs of class A are in the vast majority of cases functional as monomers [ 76]. The opioid receptors are among the most studied class A GPCRs in term of oligomerization. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 12 of 18 receptors [ 77]. Further studies have shown a key role of \x16-\x0e-opioid receptor heteromers in analgesia and neuropathic pain [ 78,79]. Oligomerization of puried \x16-opioid receptors was conrmed by uorescent techniques [ 80]. However, the homo-dimerization of the \x16-opioid receptor under physiological conditions is limited [ 81]. A recent study has shown that homo-dimerization of \x16-opioid receptors can be enhanced by certain agonists suggesting that receptor activation may be modulated by dimerization [ 82]. Homo-dimers of \x14-opioid receptors were conrmed by crystallography [ 20,23]. Rhodopsin dimers were seen in native membranes by means of atomic force microscopy [ 83]. However further studies showed that rhodopsin can function effectively as a monomer [ 84]. It was postulated that rhodopsin dimers may be required for binding of arrestins that form dimers [ 85]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'However, monomeric rhodopsin was found to be sufcient for binding of arrestin dimers [ 86]. Recently, native rhodopsin dimers were found in nanodiscs using cryo-electron microscopy [87]. So far many of GPCRs are known to exist as oligomers that differ from protomers in ligand binding and function [ 88]. The role of CLR in oligomerization was proposed for some of them, e.g., cannabinoid receptors [ 89]. An effect of CLR on oligomerization of GPCRs may be direct (CLR is an integral part of the protomer-to-protomer interface) of indirect (CLR affects the organization of the cell membrane that in turn affects the oligomerization process). Indirect as well as direct evidence exists for both mechanisms. An example of indirect effects of CLR on oligomerization is the chemokine CXCR4 receptor. Homo-dimerization of CXCR4 is conditioned by lipid rafts, as evidenced by depletion of membrane CLR that reduced dimerization of the CXCR4 receptor [ 90]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'An example of direct evidence for CLR mediated dimerization is the recently published X-ray structure of the\x0b2C-adrenergic receptor (6KUW, Chen et al., to be published). In this structure, CLR in the outer leaet of the membrane is part of the dimerization interface (Figure 6). The dimer of the \x0b2C-adrenergic receptor is symmetric with interface formed by TM1 and TM7 of each protomer. Each of two CLR molecules intercalates between TM1 and TM7 of one protomer and interacts with Q413 in the EL3 of the other protomer via water bridges. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  12 of 19     specifically bind to muscarinic receptors and modulate their activation [50]. Site-directed  mutagenesis revealed that CLR binds to the site at TM6 (R/Q6.35 and L/I6.46). From this  site, CLR prevents persiste nt activation of the M 5 receptor by wash-resistant xanomeline.  7. Effects of CLR on Oligomerization of GPCRs  In contrast to class C, GPCRs of class A are in the vast majority of cases functional as  monomers [76]. The opioid receptors are amon g the most studied class A GPCRs in term  of oligomerization. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'In their pioneering st udy, Jordan and Devi have shown that - and  -opioid receptors heterodimerize to form functionally and pharmacologically diverse re- ceptors [77]. Further studies have shown a key role of --opioid receptor heteromers in  analgesia and neuropathic pain [78, 79]. Oligomerization of purified -opioid receptors  was confirmed by fluorescent techniques [8 0]. However, the homo-dimerization of the  -opioid receptor under physiological conditions is limited [81]. A recent study has  shown that homo-dimerization of -opioid receptors can be e nhanced by certain agonists  suggesting that receptor activation may be modulated by dimerization [82]. Homo-dimers  of -opioid receptors were confirmed by crysta llography [20,23]. Rhodopsin dimers were  seen in native membranes by means of atom ic force microscopy [83]. However further  studies showed that rhodopsin can function ef fectively as a monomer [84]. It was postu- lated that rhodopsin dimers may be required for binding of arrestins that form dimers  [85]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'However, monomeric rhodopsin was found to be sufficient for binding of arrestin  dimers [86]. Recently, native rhodopsin dimers were found in nanodiscs using cryo-elec- tron microscopy [87].  So far many of GPCRs are known to exist as  oligomers that differ from protomers in  ligand binding and function [88]. The role of CLR in oligomerization was proposed for  some of them, e.g., cannabinoid receptors [89] . An effect of CLR on oligomerization of  GPCRs may be direct (CLR is an integral part  of the protomer-to-protomer interface) of  indirect (CLR affects the organization of th e cell membrane that in turn affects the oli- gomerization process). Indirect as well as direct evidence exists for both mechanisms. An example of indirect effects of CLR on olig omerization is the chemokine CXCR4 receptor.  Homo-dimerization of CXCR4 is conditioned by lipid rafts, as eviden ced by depletion of  membrane CLR that reduced dimerization of the CXCR4 receptor [90]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'An example of direct evidence for CLR mediated dimerization  is the recently published X-ray structure  of the  2C-adrenergic receptor (6KUW, Chen et al., to be published). In this structure, CLR  in the outer leaflet of the membrane is part of the dimerization interface (Figure 6). The  dimer of the 2C-adrenergic receptor is symmetric with interface formed by TM1 and TM7  of each protomer. Each of two CLR molecule s intercalates between TM1 and TM7 of one  protomer and interacts with Q413 in the EL3  of the other protomer via water bridges.    Figure 6. Dimer of the 2C-adrenergic receptor. The structure of 2C-adrenergic receptor dimer  (6KUW) as viewed from the membrane side ( A) and extracellular side ( B). Blueintracellular  edge of the membrane; Redextracellular edge of the membrane; Cyanreceptor; Goldcholes- terol.  Figure 6. Dimer of the \x0b2C-adrenergic receptor. The structure of \x0b2C-adrenergic receptor dimer (6KUW) as viewed from the membrane side ( A) and extracellular side ( B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Blueintracellular edge of the membrane; Redextracellular edge of the membrane; Cyanreceptor; Goldcholesterol. Oligomerization of \x0c2-adrenergic receptors was postulated based on the heterogeneity of agonist binding. Constitutive dimers of \x0c2-adrenergic receptors were detected in the membranes of living cells by bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) [ 91]. These dimers are functional as agonists increased BRET signal indicating agonist-induced dimerization. Coarse-grained simulations of molecular-dynamics were carried out to analyse the interactions between membrane CLR and the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor [ 92]. Results have shown the direct effects of CLR on receptor dimerization. At membranes with low CLR content, the dimer interface was most often a hetero-interface, formed by TM1 and TM2 of one protomer and TM4 and TM5 of the other. With an increase in CLR content, CLR binding to TM4 increased and prevented the formation of hetero-interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 12, 'content': 'At membranes with high CLR content, the dimer interface was formed mainly by homo-interface, formed by TM1 and TM2 from both receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 13 of 18 binding a partial inverse agonist (2RH1) indicates a possible symmetric arrangement of dimeric receptors with TM4-TM5 to TM1-helix8 interface [ 16]. The dimer interface is mediated by ordered lipids consisting of six cholesterol and two palmitic acid molecules per receptor dimer (Figure 7). At each receptor, one CLR dimer is bound to CCM between TM2 and TM4 and monomeric CLR is bound to TM1 and helix 8. Palmitic acid is covalently bound to C341 in helix 8. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 , 22, x  13 of 19     Oligomerization of 2-adrenergic receptors was postulated based on the heterogene- ity of agonist binding. Constitutive dimers of 2-adrenergic receptors were detected in the  membranes of living cells by bioluminescenc e resonance energy transfer (BRET) [91].  These dimers are functional as agonists incr eased BRET signal indicating agonist-induced  dimerization. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Coarse-grained simulations of mo lecular-dynamics were carried out to an- alyse the interactions between membrane CLR and the 2-adrenergic receptor [92]. Results  have shown the direct effects of CLR on re ceptor dimerization. At membranes with low  CLR content, the dimer interface was most often a hetero-interface, formed by TM1 and  TM2 of one protomer and TM4 and TM5 of the other. With an increase in CLR content, CLR binding to TM4 increased and prevented the formation of hetero-interface. At mem- branes with high CLR content, the dimer in terface was formed mainly by homo-interface,  formed by TM1 and TM2 from both receptors. The crystal structure of  2-adrenergic re- ceptor binding a partial inverse agonist (2RH1) indicates a possible symmetric arrange- ment of dimeric receptors with  TM4-TM5 to TM1-helix8 interface [16]. The dimer interface  is mediated by ordered lipids consisting of six cholesterol and two palmitic acid molecules  per receptor dimer (Figure 7). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'At each receptor, one CLR dimer is bound to CCM between  TM2 and TM4 and monomeric CLR is bound to TM1 and helix 8. Palmitic acid is cova-lently bound to C341 in helix 8.    Figure 7. Model of the 2-adrenergic receptor dimer. Model of a dimer of 2-adrenergic receptor  based on the crystal structure 2RH1 [16]  as viewed from the membrane side ( A) and extracellular  side ( B). Cyanreceptor; Goldcholesterol; Purplep almitic acid; Redextracellular edge of the  membrane; Blueintracellular edge of the membrane.  Oligomerization of 5-HT 1A receptors was intensively studied, however, results are  complex and capricious. In live cells, time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy revealed con- stitutive oligomers of 5-HT 1A receptors and have shown that the oligomerization of the  5-HT 1A receptors is independent of agonist stim ulation but acute depletion of membrane  CLR increases the number of oligomers [93]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'In contrast, the study from the same group  using homo-Frster resonance energy transfer (homo-FRET) and fluorescence lifetime im- aging (FLIM) confirmed constitutive oligomers of 5-HT 1A receptors but have shown that  depletion of membrane CLR and antagonist treatment decrease the population of oligo- mers and stimulation of 5-HT 1A receptors with agonists incr ease the population of oligo- mers [94]. These apparent cont radictions can be explained on  the bases of different tech- niques being able to detect different sub-popula tion of receptor oligomers. Alternatively,  receptor oligomerization (and subsequently CLR effects) is dependent on the density of  receptors in the membrane [91,95]. Using FR ET between CFP and YFP fused to C-terminus  of the receptors and site-directed mutagenesi s, TM4 and TM5 were identified as a dimer- ization interface of the 5-HT 1A receptors [96]. Coarse-grained simulations of molecular- dynamics at microsecond scale were carried out to study self-asse mbly mechanisms of  5-HT 2C receptors [97]. In CLR-free membrane, 17 different dimerization interfaces were  identified. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'The strongest dimerization wa s mediated by TM5-TM4 quasi-symmetric and  Figure 7. Model of the \x0c2-adrenergic receptor dimer. Model of a dimer of \x0c2-adrenergic receptor based on the crystal structure 2RH1 [ 16] as viewed from the membrane side ( A) and extracellular side ( B). Cyanreceptor; Goldcholesterol; Purplepalmitic acid; Redextracellular edge of the membrane; Blueintracellular edge of the membrane. Oligomerization of 5-HT 1Areceptors was intensively studied, however, results are complex and capricious. In live cells, time-resolved uorescence anisotropy revealed constitutive oligomers of 5-HT 1Areceptors and have shown that the oligomerization of the 5-HT 1Areceptors is independent of agonist stimulation but acute depletion of membrane CLR increases the number of oligomers [ 93]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'In contrast, the study from the same group using homo-Frster resonance energy transfer (homo-FRET) and uorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) conrmed constitutive oligomers of 5-HT 1Areceptors but have shown that depletion of membrane CLR and antagonist treatment decrease the population of oligomers and stimulation of 5-HT 1Areceptors with agonists increase the population of oligomers [ 94]. These apparent contradictions can be explained on the bases of different techniques being able to detect different sub-population of receptor oligomers. Alternatively, receptor oligomerization (and subsequently CLR effects) is dependent on the density of receptors in the membrane [ 91,95]. Using FRET between CFP and YFP fused to C-terminus of the receptors and site-directed mutagenesis, TM4 and TM5 were identied as a dimerization interface of the 5-HT 1Areceptors [ 96]. Coarse-grained simulations of molecular-dynamics at microsecond scale were carried out to study self-assembly mechanisms of 5-HT 2C receptors [ 97]. In CLR-free membrane, 17 different dimerization interfaces were identied. The strongest dimerization was mediated by TM5-TM4 quasi-symmetric and TM1-TM2- helix 8 symmetric dimerization. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 13, 'content': 'In CLR-rich membranes, TM1-TM7-helix 8 interface with bound CLR takes prevalence indicating an important structural role of CLR in dimerization at natural membranes that are rich in CLR. Oligomers of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors were inferred from immunopre- cipitation studies of tagged receptors [ 98,99] and ligand binding not following binary reaction [ 100102]. Moreover, it was observed that CLR induces heterogeneity in the binding among various radioligands. The proposed explanation is that CLR promotes cooperativity in the binding among antagonists bound to the oligomeric M 2receptor [ 103]. Further multi-photon uorescence resonance energy transfer studies suggested that CLR may be a constituent of a dimer-to-dimer interface of the M 3receptor tetramer [104]. Another group of GPCRs of Class A at which important role of membrane CLR has been detected are chemokine receptors. Depletion of membrane CLR by methyl- \x0c- cyclodextrin ablated CCR5 signalling [ 105]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 1953 14 of 18 lized CXCR4 receptors [ 57]. CLR affects oligomerization and signal trafcking of chemokine receptors [ 14]. As chemokine receptors do not possess a CCM, effects of CLR on membrane uidity and organization into rafts were postulated as underlying mechanisms in oligomer- ization and promotion of the signalling hubs enable signal trafcking. Organization of chemokine receptors in lipid rafts leads to stabilizing particular receptor conformations that are manifested in changes in chemokine binding. Besides indirect CLR effects on oligomerization of chemokine receptors, CLR binding to dimers of CXCR4 was predicted using molecular dynamics simulations [ 106]. In molecular modelling studies, CLR changes the pattern of CXCR4 dimerization. While in CLR-free phospholipid bilayers CXCR4 dimer- izes via TM1 to TM5-TM7 interface, in the presence of CLR CXCR4 dimerizes through the symmetric TM3-TM4 to TM3-TM4 interface intercalated by cholesterol molecules. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 14, 'content': '8. Perspectives Evidence for the role of membrane CLR in GPCRs binding, activation, signalling, and oligomerization is overwhelming. Balanced levels of membrane CLR determine the proper function of GPCRs. Moderate ne-tuning of CLR levels thus represents a therapeutic op- portunity in conditions with an altered CLR level. Membrane CLR facilitates the formation of microdomains termed lipid rafts. Lipid rafts affect the specicity and efcacy of GPCR signalling and represent another CLR-related target in experimental therapeutic. High-afnity binding of CLR to a receptor is very common among GPCRs of class A. It was demonstrated not only to canonical sites like cholesterol consensus motif (CCM) and CLR recognition amino acid consensus (CRAC/CARC) but also to non-canonical ones. These ndings open a way for the development of new high-afnity allosteric modulators of GPCRs based on steroid scaffold of CLR. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Allosteric Modulation of GPCRs of Class A by Cholesterol', 'page': 14, 'content': 'For example, several neurosteroids that share a steroid scaffold with CLR have been shown to exert their non-genomic effects via mus- carinic [ 107,108], serotonin [ 109], or\x0b2-adrenergic receptors [ 110]. The variability in the CLR effects and binding motifs, as well as different location of CLR-binding sites among GPCRs, gives a chance for the development of selective allosteric modulators based on sterol structure targeting the CLR-binding site. The possibility to achieve pharmacolog- ical selectivity based on receptor-membrane interactions is a completely new approach in pharmacotherapy. To facilitate the development of CLR-oriented therapies detailed picture of the ac- tion of membrane CLR on GPCRs binding, activation, signalling, and oligomerization is needed. To this end, one needs to apply state-of-the-art techniques for analysis of changes in the organization of the membrane and interactions among membrane components. Advanced uorescent techniques like BRET, FRET-FLIM, and anisotropy-FRET represent promising approaches. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 1, 'content': 'REVIEW published: 12 July 2019 doi: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00428 Frontiers in Endocrinology | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 428Editedby: EricReiter, InstitutNationaldelaRecherche Agronomique(INRA),France Reviewedby: MohammedAkliAyoub, UnitedArabEmiratesUniversity, UnitedArabEmirates LivioCasarini, UniversityofModenaandReggio Emilia,Italy AylinCarlaHanyaloglu, ImperialCollegeLondon, UnitedKingdom *Correspondence: YungHouWong boyung@ust.hk Specialtysection: Thisarticlewassubmittedto CellularEndocrinology, asectionofthejournal FrontiersinEndocrinology Received: 17April2019 Accepted: 14June2019 Published: 12July2019 Citation: TseLHandWongYH(2019)GPCRs inAutocrineandParacrine Regulations. Front.Endocrinol.10:428. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 1, 'content': 'doi:10.3389/fendo.2019.00428GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations LapHangTse1andYungHouWong1,2* 1DivisionofLifeScience,BiotechnologyResearchInstitute ,HongKongUniversityofScienceandTechnology,HongKong, HongKong,2StateKeyLaboratoryofMolecularNeuroscience,Molecular NeuroscienceCenter,HongKongUniversityof ScienceandTechnology,HongKong,HongKong G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute the larges t superfamily of integral membrane protein receptors. As signal detectors, the sever al 100 known GPCRs are responsible for sensing the plethora of endogenous ligands that are critical for the functioning of our endocrine system. Although GPCRs are typ ically considered as detectors for rst messengers in classical signal transduc tion pathways, they seldom operate in isolation in complex biological systems. Interc ellular communication between identicalordifferentcelltypesisoftenmediatedbyautoc rineorparacrinesignalsthatare generated upon activation of specic GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 1, 'content': 'In the context o f energy homeostasis, the distinct complement of GPCRs in each cell type bridges the au tocrine and paracrine communication within an organ, and the various downstream s ignaling mechanisms regulated by GPCRs can be integrated in a cell to produce an ul timate output. GPCRs thusactasgatekeepersthatcoordinateandne-tunearespo nse.Byexaminingtherole of GPCRs in activating and receiving autocrine and paracrin e signals, one may have a better understanding of endocrine diseases that are associ ated with GPCR mutations, thereby providing new insights for treatment regimes. Keywords: G protein, receptor, autocrine, paracrine, sign aling INTRODUCTION Tomaintainhomeostasisinhumans,awidearrayofextracellu larfactorsisrequiredtoharmonize physiological activities between various organs and tissue s. These signaling molecules in the form of hormones, peptides, neurotransmitters, proteins, ions, an d lipids act via specic receptors to elicit cellular responses. Among the dierent receptor familie s, more than 700G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) form the largest and the most diverse recepto r superfamily that participate in virtually all aspects of human physiology. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Most human GPCRs can b e grouped into ve families (Glutamate, Rhodopsin, Adhesion, Frizzled/Taste2, and Sec retin) according to their structural similarity, which is known as the GRAFS classication syste m (1). The physiological relevance makes GPCRs one of the most popular drug targets ( 2), and their importance in the eld of endocrinology is highlighted by the identication of natur ally occurring GPCR mutations in patientswithvariousendocrinediseases( 3).Inclassicalendocrinesystems,hormonesarereleased into the bloodstream and they modify target cells in a distan t part of the body; it has become apparent that these processes are regulated by cellular communi cations encompassing autocrine, paracrine, intracrine, and juxtacrine interactions. In thi s review, we will focus on our current, yet evolving understanding of the autocrine and paracrine si gnals regulated by GPCRs in various physiological systems. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Tse and Wong GPCRs in Autocrine/Paracrine Signaling determinants, with crosstalk between dierent signaling pathways that culminate in the ne-tuning of cellular response s, it is important to examine the role of GPCRs in the context of signalprocessingwithinandbetweendierentcellsandtissu es. GPCRS AND THE HIERARCHY OF ENDOCRINE, AUTOCRINE AND PARACRINE SIGNALING Although the discovery of autocrine and paracrine interacti ons was initially overshadowed by the characterization of endo crine glands, the concept of cells being able to secrete regulatory factors was rst appreciated more than 200 years ago by leading scientists of the time, including Brown-Squard wh om many regarded as the father of endocrinology. It is now rmly established that the endocrine glands are regulated b y a plethora of internal and external signals via blood circulat ion, and that these input signals can further trigger the release of autocrine/paracrine messengers. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Various autocrine/para crine factors are known to contribute to the communications and intricate feedbacks between dierent types of cells within an endocrine gland, resulting in a coordinated hormonal output and the corresponding physiological outcome. Remarkably, the same chemical molecules can be used in multiple contexts of endocrine, paracrine or autocrine signaling, or even in synaptic signaling. The function of these signaling molecul es can be considered in a hierarchical manner ( Figure1) for the majority of endocrine organs as: (1) a circulatory input that initiates the subsequent autocrine/paracrine interaction s; (2) an autocrine/paracrine messenger that mediates the feedbac k networks among dierent cells within the endocrine gland; and (3) a hormonal output secreted by endocrine cells, which enter the circulation and further serve as a circulatory inpu t for other organs. Among these signaling processes, GPCRs are ineluctable mediators in sensing both circulatory input s and autocrine/paracrine factors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'According to the GRAFS classication scheme, there are ve classes of vertebrate G PCRs (1) whose dierential distribution on dierent cell types helps to ensure specicity of the feedback network. Because optimal utilization of nutrient is a vital prerequisite for survival , this review will focus on examples of GPCRs in the Rhodopsin and Secretin families that regulate energy homeostasis. Howev er, it should be noted that the concept of GPCRs mediating autocrine/paracrine responses is applicable to many other endocrine tissues/organs such as adipose tissue ( 4), the adrenal gland (5), and testis ( 6). Other classes of GPCRs are also functionally essential for various endocrine systems; a pri me exampleisthecalcium-sensingreceptoroftheGlutamatefami ly forcalciumhomeostasis( 7). PANCREATIC GPCRS IN THE REGULATION OF ENERGY HOMEOSTASIS The human pancreas is composed of granular tissues embedded with a duct system. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'While exocrine cells constitute the majo r biomass of the pancreas, a small cluster of endocrine cells fo rmsthe pancreatic islet, including three key cell types: glucagon- secreting -cells,insulin-secreting -cells,somatostatin-secreting -cells (8) (Figure2). The pancreatic islet is an important peripheral endocrine gland for maintaining blood glucose leve l and energy homeostasis. To adjust energy uctuation caused b y food intake, circadian rhythm or physical activities, the isl et is sensitive to signals which are regulated by the hypothalamus as well as to other circulatory signals such as nutrients and hormones.HumanisletGPCRmRNAprolinghasidentied293 isletGPCRsthatrespondto271dierentendogenousligands,of which at least 131 ligands are present in islet cells ( 9). However, the majority of islet GPCRs have unknown eects on pancreatic hormonesecretion.Readersmayrefertootherreviewsforthe full list of islet GPCRs discovered in humans and their comparative analysis with mouse islet GPCRs ( 9,10). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Besides GPCRs, other receptor types such as tyrosine kinases are also able to regulat e pancreaticresponses.Itshouldbenotedthatsignalcrosstal kand transactivation linkages between GPCR and non-PCR pathways constitute yet another layer of signaling complexity in ener gy homeostasis( 11). GPCRs for Sensing Circulatory Inputs There are numerous GPCRs in the pancreas that can detect circulatory nutrients and related hormones, and the major examples are listed in Table1. A few examples will be discussed to illustrate the role of GPCRs as circulatory signal sensors that induce subsequent autocrine/paracrine interactions i n the pancreas.Oneofthebest-knownincretinhormonesisglucagon - like peptide 1 (GLP1), which is secreted by the intestinal L- cells upon food consumption and circulates throughout the body, including the pancreatic islet which expresses GLP1 receptor (GLP1R). GLP1R is coupled to G sproteins to control the secretion of insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin that facilitate glucose disposal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The activation of GLP1R on mouse -cells induces a robust up-regulation of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) receptor, which triggers the IGF1/IGF 2 receptor autocrine loop associated with an increase of Akt phosphorylation, with the Akt pathway bestowing an anti- apoptotic eect ( 25). GLP1R expressed on - and -cells can also direct the paracrine regulations by activating the secretion of insulin and somatostatin, respectively, to inhi bit glucagon secretion by -cells. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), another incretin hormone which acts on the G s-coupled GIP receptor (GIPR), mediates similar responses as GLP1 but its mechanism of action is less understood ( 12). In addition, GIP can induce the production of interleukin-6 (IL6) by cells, which in turn stimulates the production of GLP1 and insulin secretion by -cells, forming another paracrine loop(24). Interestingly, apart from circulatory hormones, energy sources like free fatty acids (FFAs) can also act as signaling molecules. FFAs are obtained from dietary fat. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Depending on the length of the carbon chain, FFAs bind to a multitude of GPCRs which are known as FFA receptors (FFARs), including Gprotein-coupledreceptor41(GPR41)andGPR43thatbindto short chain FFAs, GPR84 for medium chain FFAs, GPR40 and GPR120 for long-chain FFAs, and GPR119 for long-chain FFAs Frontiers in Endocrinology | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 428', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Tse and Wong GPCRs in Autocrine/Paracrine Signaling FIGURE 1 | Schematic diagram of endocrine, autocrine, and paracrine c ommunications in energy homeostasis. Circulating molecul es such as neurohormones, hormones and nutrients are derived from CNS, endocrine orga ns and tissues, and small intestine. These molecules in bloo d are circulated to different parts of the body. The molecules diffused into endocrine organs act as ci rculatory inputs (1), which then bind to receptors on target cells and trigger the secretion of autocrine and paracrine factors, so as to foster communications between t he same or different cell types (2). As a result of signal inte gration from various autocrine/paracrine factors, hormone secretions from endocrine cells are adjus ted, and hormonal outputs are released into the circulation (3), which can further inuence other organs and tissues to maintain homeostasis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 3, 'content': 'FIGURE 2 | A schematic diagram showing the autocrine and paracrine int eractions between pancreatic -,-, and -cells that regulate the insulin output. Glucagon and acetylcholine from -cell (beige), and somatostatin from -cell (blue) are stimulatory and inhibitory signals for hor mone secretion, respectively, that can act in both autocrine and paracrine manners via their receptors (GCGR f or glucagon; M 1R, M3R, and M 5R for acetylcholine; SSTR 2and SSTR 5for somatostatin). The insulin output from -cell (green) is adjusted by an integration of paracrine sig nals from both - and -cells within the niche. andcannabinoid( 26).TheseFFARsaredierentiallydistributed intissuesandtheysignalthroughdierentGproteinsforener gy homeostasis. For example, GPR40 (also known as FFAR1) isexpressedinhumanisletsatlevelscomparabletothoseofGLP1 R. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCRs in Autocrine and Paracrine Regulations', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Tse and Wong GPCRs in Autocrine/Paracrine Signaling TABLE 1 | Examples of GPCRs in the pancreatic islet for receiving circ ulatory inputs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 1, 'content': '/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001 /gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Raymond, J.H.; Aktary, Z.; Larue, L.; Delmas, V . Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma. Cancers 2022 ,14, 706. https:// doi.org/10.3390/cancers14030706 Academic Editor: Chalid Assaf Received: 6 January 2022 Accepted: 27 January 2022 Published: 29 January 2022 Publishers Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afl- iations. Copyright:  2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/). cancers Review Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma Jrmy H. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Raymond1,2 , Zackie Aktary1,2, Lionel Larue1,2,* and V ronique Delmas1,2 1Institut Curie, Universit PSL, CNRS UMR3347, Inserm U1021, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91400 Orsay, France; jeremy.raymond@curie.fr (J.H.R.); zackie.aktary@curie.fr (Z.A.); veronique.delmas@curie.fr (V .D.) 2Universit Paris-Saclay, CNRS UMR3347, Inserm U1021, Signalisation Radiobiologie et Cancer, 91400 Orsay, France *Correspondence: Lionel.larue@curie.fr Simple Summary: Sixteen G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been involved in melanogene- sis or melanomagenesis. Here, we review these GPCRs, their associated signaling, and therapies. Abstract: G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) serve prominent roles in melanocyte lineage physiol- ogy, with an impact at all stages of development, as well as on mature melanocyte functions. GPCR ligands are present in the skin and regulate melanocyte homeostasis, including pigmentation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 1, 'content': 'The role of GPCRs in the regulation of pigmentation and, consequently, protection against external aggres- sion, such as ultraviolet radiation, has long been established. However, evidence of new functions of GPCRs directly in melanomagenesis has been highlighted in recent years. GPCRs are coupled, through their intracellular domains, to heterotrimeric G-proteins, which induce cellular signaling through various pathways. Such signaling modulates numerous essential cellular processes that occur during melanomagenesis, including proliferation and migration. GPCR-associated signaling in melanoma can be activated by the binding of paracrine factors to their receptors or directly by activating mutations. In this review, we present melanoma-associated alterations of GPCRs and their downstream signaling and discuss the various preclinical models used to evaluate new therapeutic approaches against GPCR activity in melanoma. Recent striking advances in our understanding of the structure, function, and regulation of GPCRs will undoubtedly broaden melanoma treatment options in the future. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Keywords: G-protein-coupled receptor; mouse models; skin cancer; UVR; drug; network 1. Introduction G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) participate in intercellular communication by re- ceiving extracellular stimuli from the microenvironment. They then amplify and transduce the signal, passing it on to the nucleus, where it triggers an appropriate cellular response. GPCRs can bind to a wide variety of ligands (hormones, proteins, peptides, amino acids, lipids, nucleotides, xenobiotics, etc.) and regulate numerous essential physiological pro- cesses during development and in adult life. GPCRs are the largest receptor family in the mammalian genome, with over 800 members [ 1]. The GPCR family is composed of receptors that share a common structure, consisting of seven transmembrane helices that are associated with a heterotrimeric G-protein. These receptors are known to regulate many essential physiological processes and their aberrant expression or activity can contribute to human diseases, including cancer. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 1, 'content': 'GPCRs are among the most common drug targets because they can be activated or blocked by low molecular weight molecules that have a very strong interaction with their receptors. Their importance in drug discovery is demon- strated by the fact that nearly 60% of drugs in the developmental stage and 36% of currently marketed drugs target human GPCRs, representing around 700 molecules [ 2]. However, Cancers 2022 ,14, 706. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 2 of 39 only 10 of these molecules are used in cancer therapy and none have yet been approved for melanoma [3]. Melanoma is a skin cancer that arises from melanocytes, the cells responsible for pigmentation. It affects more than 320,000 people worldwide each year, resulting in the death of nearly 60,000 patients [ 4]. According to the WHOs International Agency for Research on Cancer, the incidence is expected to continue to rise in the coming years, reaching half a million patients by 2040. Mortality estimates are also on the rise, with 97,000 deaths estimated for 2040, despite the development of new therapies in the sec- ond half of the 2010s [ 4]. These treatments are based on two approaches: (1) inhibition of the MAPK/ERK pathway in melanoma using a combination of activated BRAF and MEK inhibitorstargeted therapy (TT)and (2) inhibition of immune cell exhaustion using the checkpoint inhibitors iCTL4 and iPD1immunotherapy (IT)[ 5]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Although these treatments have signicantly increased patient survival, half of treated patients re- lapse [ 6]. Furthermore, despite signicant recent progress in both targeted therapies and immunotherapies for treating advanced-stage disease, the long-term prognosis for patients with cutaneous melanoma is still poor. Therefore, an effective, reliable cure for melanoma undoubtedly requires further therapeutic innovation. Moreover, 4060% patients are not responsive to current treatments. GPCRs play crucial roles in various physiological processes, including neurotransmis- sion, cardiac and sensory function, immune responses, and regulation of the pigmentary system. Pigmentation phenotypes have been observed with eight GPCRs (Table 1). Table 1. GPCR and pigmentation GPCRs involved in pigmentary phenotypes in mouse and human. Gene Cyto.locReceptor NameSignaling Mouse Model Human Disease Function(s) References DRD2 11q23.2Dopamine D2 G \x0bsHyperpigmentation eg. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Drd2tm1Ebo/Drd2tm1Ebo\x0bMSH synthesis[7] EDNRB 13q22.3Endothelin B G \x0bqHypopigmentation eg. Ednrbs-l/Ednrbs-lWS4A (#277580) ABCD syndrome (#600501)Proliferation Survival DNA repair[8] FZD4 11q14.2Frizzled 4 \x0c-cateninHypopigmentation eg. Fzd4tm1Nat/Fzd4tm1Nat[9] GPR143 Xp22.2Protein G143 G \x0bqEye hypopigmentation eg. Gpr143tm1Inc/YOA1 (#300808, #300500)Melanogenesis [10] GPR161 1q24.2Protein G141 G \x0bsWhite belly spot eg. Gpr161vl/Gpr161vlShh negative regulator[11] GRM1 6q24.3Glutamate receptor metabotropic 1G\x0bqHyperpigmentation eg. Tg(Dct-Grm1)ESzcProliferation Survival[12] MC1R 16q24.3Melanocortin 1 receptorG\x0bsYellow coat Mc1re/Mc1reLight skin, red/blond hairSwitch eu/pheomelanin DNA repair[13] SMO 7q32.1Smoothened GliStriped depigmentation Curry-Jones syndrome (#601707)[14] The major signaling is indicated for each protein as well as the most characterized mouse mutant. For some of the proteins a human pathology is associated, the OMIM link is indicated (#). The reference is indicated in brackets in the last column. Cyto.loc. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 2, 'content': '= cytogenic location, Ocular albinism = OA, Waardenburg syndrome = WS, Albinism, black lock, cell migration disorder of the neurocytes of the gut = ABCD.', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 3 of 39 Aside from its cosmetic role, pigmentation is a natural sunscreen that potently absorbs ultraviolet radiation (UVR) and is among the most important factors that determine UV sensitivity and melanoma risk. The melanin pigments responsible for the color of the skin and hair are synthesized within the melanosomes of melanocytes. In the epidermis, melanosomes generated by melanocytes are transferred to keratinocytes to allow homoge- nous pigmentation and protection of the entire skin against UVR. In the skin, melanocytes, keratinocytes, and dermal broblasts communicate with each other via secreted factors and cell-to-cell contact. The crosstalk of the various signaling pathways between these cells constitutes a complex network that controls pigmentation and melanocyte homeostasis. Genetics and in vitro studies have identied loci that regulate pigmentation, and among them, certain key regulators belong to the GPCR family. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 3, 'content': 'For example, the identication of the mouse extension locus (extension, recessive yellow, or Mc1r) associated with cloning of the melanocortin 1 receptor ( MC1R ) gene in human melanocytes identied this GPCR as the primary regulator of pigment synthesis. Apart from its effects on melanin pro- duction and consequently, UVR protection, the MC1R has functions extending beyond pigmentation, which explain how MC1R activity is directly involved in multiple aspects of melanomagenesis. In contrast to epidermal melanocytes, which have a long-life span and low prolifer- ative capacity during adult life, the precursor cells of melanocytes, called melanoblasts, proliferate and actively migrate during embryonic development to colonize the entire skin. Many signaling molecules/ligands are required during all stages of melanocyte development. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 3, 'content': 'These ligands educate neural crest cells (NCCs) to specify the melanocytic fate and instruct melanoblasts to proliferate, migrate, survive, and home (towards their nal destination) prior to terminal differentiation into pigmented melanocytes. Approxi- mately 100 genes have been shown to be specically involved in melanocyte development. Among these genes, two GPCRs play a key role: the EDNRB (endothelin receptor type B, with its ligand endothelin 3) and FZL (frizzled receptor, with its ligands WNT1/3A and one of its mediators, \x0c-catenin). Of note, the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the proliferation and migration of melanoblasts during development and those of melanoma cells during tumor progression are often closely related. Therefore, it is not surprising to nd that key regulators of melanocyte development are also important players in melanomagenesis. The objective of this review is to provide an update on the GPCRs that have an important, well-identied role in melanomagenesis and to discuss the therapeutic strategies that have been used to target these GPCRs. 2. Impact of GPCRs on Melanoma Initiation and Progression 2.1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Melanomagenesis During the multi-step process of melanomagenesis, skin melanocytes are transformed into melanoma. Briey, the rst steps consist of the benign proliferation of melanocytes to form a nevus, in which the melanocytes are grouped together and lose their characteristic contacts with keratinocytes. The melanocytes in the nevus eventually stop proliferating and become senescent. As melanomagenesis continues, nevus melanocytes are able to bypass senescence and enter the radial growth phase (RGP), where they typically supercially proliferate toward the basement membrane of the epidermis. These primary steps can be de- ned as melanoma initiation. Then, during the vertical growth phase (VGP), melanoma cells continue to actively proliferate and acquire migratory and invasive properties, allow- ing them to cross the basement membrane and invade the dermis. The cells eventually acquire metastatic characteristics as they enter the bloodstream and/or lymphatic vessels and eventually colonize various tissues and organs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 3, 'content': 'These latter stages can be considered as the progression of the disease. Melanomagenesis is associated with changes in many cellular processes, such as proliferation, immortalization, pseudo-epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration, and invasion. Cutaneous melanomas are molecularly classied into four groups based on their mutations: BRAF, RAS, NF1, and the triple wildtype. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 4 of 39 of the MAPK and/or PI3K/AKT pathway that supports tumor cell growth, proliferation, survival, and anti-apoptotic signals. The only effective way to demonstrate the causal role of a gene in tumor initiation is to use animal models, whose use allows a better understanding of tumor progression in a physiological context. Indeed, it is very difcult, if not impossible, to reproduce the in vivo cell-cell organization and microenvironment in vitro . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 4, 'content': 'However, simple or complex in vitro models are very useful for deciphering the involvement of key genetic elements in various cellular processes, but cannot be used to determine the causal role of a gene in tumorigenesis because (i) established melanoma cell lines are often derived from metastases in which the cells have already undergone a complete transformation process, (ii) the cells are grown on plastic, without their microenvironment, and (iii) colonization of distant organs is very difcult or impossible to assess. Various animal models allow evaluation of the proliferation and bypass of senescence (initiation) and invasion and metastasis (progression). Several animal models have been used to better understand melanomagenesis, including mouse, dog, pig, horse, chicken, and zebrash. In this review, we focus on the currently best studied mouse models for melanomagenesis. 2.2. GPCRs in Melanoma GPCRs regulate many key biological functions, such as cell differentiation, prolifera- tion, migration, and metabolic activity. Thus, it is not surprising that they play a role in tumorigenesis, including melanomagenesis [ 15]. There are four main mechanisms by which GPCRs can drive tumorigenesis: (i) excess ligand availability, (ii) excess GPCR expression, (iii) activating mutations in GPCRs, and (iv) activating mutations in G \x0bproteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The role of certain GPCRs during melanomagenesis has been studied using nat- ural (or chemically induced) mouse mutants of genes of interest or novel engineered gain- and loss-of-function mutants. A list of mouse mutants with pigmentation pheno- types is available and regularly updated (http://www.ifpcs.org/colorgenes/ accessed on 2 January 2022) [ 16]. In the case of genetically modied mutants, targeting of the melanocytic lineage is performed using the tyrosinase (Tyr), tyrosinase related protein 1 (Tyrp1), dopachrome tautomerase (Dct), or microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf) promoters/enhancers in the transgenic constructs [ 17]. Cre recombinase is used to generate conditional mutants, which are required when genes are essential in other lineages and/or during development: Tyr::Cre, Tyr::CreERT2-Lar, and Tyr::CreERT2-Bos[1820]. The known GPCRs involved in melanomagenesis are presented in the following section. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The role of certain GPCRs in melanocyte transformation is predictable, given their key function in melanocyte development and homeostasis (ET/EDNRB, MSH/MC1R, WNT/FZD), whereas the involvement of other GPCRs in melanomagenesis was less expected, such as GRM1, GRM3, GRM5, PAR1, CXCR4, CCR7, CCR10 and GPER1 (Table 2). 2.2.1. Endothelin Receptor Type B (EDNRB) The endothelin (ET) system consists of two class A G-protein-coupled receptors, en- dothelin receptors type A and B (EDNRA and EDNRB, respectively) and their three similar peptide ligands, endothelin-1, -2, and -3 (ET1, 2, 3). The EDNRB is the predominant receptor expressed by melanocytes/melanomas and binds all ETs with the same afnity. Edn3 and Ednrb were rst found to play a major role during the development of melanocytes from NCCs using genetic knockout mouse models and then, by analogy, to the classic mouse mutants, piebald and lethal spotting [ 8,36]. Indeed, Ednrb andEdn3 genetically engineered mice (GEM) are both allelic to the spontaneous mouse mutations that occur at the piebald and lethal spotting loci. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Recessive mutations at either of these loci give rise to similar phenotypes consisting of differing degrees of hypopigmentation and aganglionic mega- colon, due to the absence of enteric ganglia, which have the same neural crest embryonic origin as melanocytes. Reciprocally, increased expression of Edn3 in the epidermis leads to increased numbers of melanocytes and hyperpigmentation [ 37]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 5 of 39 formation [ 38]. Germline Ednrb deletion does not lead to tumorigenesis but to the absence of melanocytes, mainly in the dermis. The role of Ednrb in melanomagenesis has been evaluated in the context of oncogenic GNAQQ209Lsignaling (see next paragraph). The expression of GNAQQ209L(encoding for G \x0bq) is not sufcient to replace EDNRB signaling during embryonic development, suggesting that G \x0bqmay not be the only G-protein acti- vated downstream of EDNRB (or other signaling pathways). Using a conditional knockout approach, GNAQQ209Linduced melanomagenesis is inhibited in the absence of Ednrb, including lung metastases ( Mitf-cre /+;Rosa-fs-GNAQQ209L/+;EdnrbF/Fbackground) [ 21]. Intriguingly, germline haploinsufciency for Ednrb has the opposite effect in the RET mouse melanoma model ( Metallothionein-1/RFP-RET ;Ednrb+/\x00mice), in which it accelerates tu- morigenesis, with an increase in lung metastases [ 39]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 5, 'content': 'These two mouse models are of interest and clearly show that Ednrb expression affects melanomagenesis. However, they have the disadvantage of representing an uncommon oncogenic situation in human cuta- neous melanoma, with haploinsufciency or the lack of Ednrb combined with a GNAQQ209L driver mutation or increased RET signaling. Table 2. GPCR and melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Gene Cyto.locReceptor Name Signaling Animal Model Melanomagenesis Function(s) References EDNRB 13q22.3Endothelin B G\x0bqMitf-cre/+; Rosa-fs- GNAQQ209L/+; EdnrbF/Finitiation progressionProliferation Invasion DNA repair[21] [22] MC1R 16q24.3Melanocortin 1 G \x0bsTyr::CreERT2/\x0e; BrafV600E; MC1Re/e initiationProliferation DNA repair[23] [24] FZD7 2q33.1Frizzled 7 \x0c-cateninXen., A375P , WM1361 shRNA-FZD7progression Proliferation[25] [26] GPER1 7p22.3G-protein- coupled estrogen receptorG\x0bsXen., NHEM with BRAFV600E;p53R248W; CDK4R24C; hTERTinitiation Differentiation [27] GRM1 6q24.3Glutamate receptor metabotropic 1G\x0bq Dct::Grm1initiation progressionProliferation Invasion[12] [28] GRM3 7q21.11/12Glutamate receptor metabotropic 3G\x0bqXen., A375 GRM3 S610L, E767K, or E870K;initiation progressionProliferation Migration[29] GRM5 11q14.2/3Glutamate receptor metabotropic 5G\x0bq Tyrp1::Grm5initiation progressionProliferation Invasion[30] PAR1/F2R 5q13.3Coagulation factor II ThrombinG\x0bqXen. A375 shRNA-PAR1progression: Proliferation [31] CXCR4 2q22.1CXC motif chemokine 4G\x0bi/0Allograft B16 Ectopic expression Blocking peptide T22progressionAttraction Growth[32] [33] CCR7 17q21.2CC motif chemokine 7G\x0bi/0Allograft B16 Ectopic expression Neutral. anti-CCL21 abprogressionAttraction Growth[34] CCR10 17q21.2CC motif chemokine 10G\x0bi/0Allograft B16 Ectopic expressionprogressionImmune invasion Apop. resistance[35] GPCRs involved in melanoma from transgenic mice model or cell grafting or injection. The main associated signaling pathway is indicated as well as the cellular processes induced by the receptor activation. The reference is indicated in brackets in the last column. Cyto.loc. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 5, 'content': '= cytogenic location, ab = Antibody, Xen. = Xenograft, Neutral. = Neutralizing, Apop. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 6 of 39 Interest in EDNRB in melanoma stems primarily from early observations in humans showing that EDNRB expression was positively associated with cutaneous melanoma progression; EDNRB mRNA and protein levels were found to increase from common nevi to dysplastic nevi and from primary to metastatic melanoma [ 40]. Consistent with this observation, in vitro experiments showed that ET promoted melanoma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and that EDNRB inhibitors reduced melanoma cell growth and survival in culture and xenografts [ 4143]. However, overexpression of EdnrB alone or combined with driver mutations was not performed in mice to genetically address its role in tumorigenesis in physiological situations. Another aspect of ET signaling in melanoma is its activity in DNA repair, which has a role in reducing the genotoxic effect of UVR [ 22]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Indeed, ET signaling increases intracellu- lar Ca++mobilization and downstream activation of the stress-induced MAP kinases JNK and p38 in UV-irradiated human melanocytes. This activation in turn enhances the repair of cyclobutane pyrimidines (CPDs), the major form of DNA photoproducts [ 44]. Finally, a recent study has suggested that ET signaling has a multifunctional role in melanoma, acting on both tumorigenic and stromal cells, where it mediates immunosuppression by increasing Treg proliferation [ 45]. Thus, although the role of EDNRB signaling is relatively well understood during melanocyte development, its role in malignant transformation is much less clear, as it acts in multiple signaling pathways and is context dependent. As such, it is not surprising that therapies that target EDNRB have thus far not been very successful. Small-molecule inhibitors of EDNRB, A-192621 and BQ788, were shown to inhibit the growth and survival of melanoma cells in culture and in xenografts [42,43,46] . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 6, 'content': 'However, the dual EDNRA/EDNRB antagonist, Bosentan, was tested in phase II clinical trials and failed to produce a robust response in cutaneous melanoma patients, neither alone nor in combination with dacarbazine [ 47,48]. Similarly, A-192621 treatment of mice expressing Ednrb in the context of oncogenic GNAQQ209Lshowed no effect on tumorigenesis, whereas haploinsufciency for Ednrb reduced it. Targeting EDNRB with an antibody-drug conju- gate (DEDN6526A) is currently being tested in phase I [ 49]. It would be of great interest to generate a mouse model that reects the human EdnRB situation in cutaneous melanoma: overexpression of EDNRB (human and mouse) in melanocytes/melanoma combined with oncogenic BRAFV600Eor NRASQ61K/R, the major driver mutations in human cutaneous melanoma. Such models would allow a better understanding of the effect of Ednrb overex- pression on melanomagenesis, the study of its downstream signaling, and the testing of its inhibitors in a human relevant preclinical mouse model before clinical trials. 2.2.2. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 6, 'content': 'The Melanocortin Receptor (MC1R) Melanocytes express a receptor ( MC1R ) that controls melanogenesis. The MC1R be- longs to a small subfamily of GPCRs, classied into ve subtypes (MCR1-5) that contribute to important physiological processes. MC1R is the only melanocortin receptor expressed in melanocytes. MC1R is a class A receptor and is coupled to Gs protein. MC1R binds to the pro-opiomelanocortin-derived peptide \x0b-melanocyte-stimulating hormone ( \x0b-MSH), resulting in the activation of downstream signaling cascades in a cAMP-PKA-dependent manner [ 50]. Upon UV exposure, \x0b-MSH is released by keratinocytes, leading to stimula- tion of the MC1R at the melanocyte membrane, the activation of protein kinase A (PKA), and ultimately, to increased cAMP levels. Other pathways independent of UV exposure can lead to increased \x0b-MSH production and hyperpigmentation, as observed in the Dopamine receptor D2 knockout (DRD2tm1Ebo) [ 7]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 6, 'content': 'An important target of cAMP is the transcription factor CREB (CAMP-responsive element-binding protein), which becomes phosphorylated and then activates the promoter of MITF , which in turn up-regulates the transcription of the melanogenesis enzyme genes TYR ,TYRP1 , and DCT , as well as those regulating other cellular processes, including proliferation, invasion and metabolism [ 51,52]. In addition, binding of neurobromin 1 (NF1) to MC1R regulates intracellular signaling pathways in- volved in pigmentation [ 53]. MC1R is the product of the gene located at the extension locus and stimulates the synthesis of the pigment, eumelanin (black, brown). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 7 of 39 mutation in this locus, recessive yellow (e/e), results in the production of pheomelanin (yel- low, red) instead of eumelanin [ 13,54]. An MC1R antagonist is the agouti signaling protein (ASP). Mutations in the mouse Agouti gene that cause increased and ectopic expression of ASIP ( viable yellow ,Avy) result in yellow coat color, similar to the phenotype of e/emice, as well as obesity due to ASIP binding to the MC4R. In humans, more than 200 MC1R variants have been identied and high numbers of natural MC1R variants are strongly associated with pigmentary phenotypes, providing evidence that the MC1R is the main determinant of human pigmentation and central to eu- and pheo-melanin regulation [ 50]. Similar to mice, MC1R variants in humans can result in the reduction of receptor activity and a shift in melanin synthesis from eumelanin to pheomelanin. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 7, 'content': 'MC1R is inactivated in people with red hair, due to polymorphism(s) that make(s) them more susceptible to melanoma than dark-skinned individuals. For example, variants of the gene encoding MC1R , mainly R151C, R160W, and D294H, have been shown to be associated with light and poorly pigmented skin [ 55], whereas the WT form is associated with dark, highly pigmented skin [ 56,57]. Similarly, patients with mutations in proopiomelanocortin ( POMC ) genesencoding the precursor of \x0bMSHhave red hair [ 58] These variants decrease the sensitivity of the receptor and binding of the hormone \x0b-MSH, produced by keratinocytes in response to UVR. Epidemiology studies have strongly established that the MC1R func- tions as a melanoma predisposition gene. However, it is still not clear whether this is due to the lack of eumelanin, to photoprotective and antioxidant activities, to the expression of pheomelanin, which is known to amplify UVA-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS), or to other functions not related to pigmentation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Indeed, pheomelanin was shown to promote melanomagenesis via the induction of oxidative DNA damage, without exposure to any carcinogens, such as UVR, in mice harboring the activating BrafV600Emutation combined with MC1Re/e[23]. Thus, loss of function of MC1R promotes initiation in a UV-independent manner, demonstrating its tumor suppressor activity and a key role in the initiation of melanoma. Apart from its central role in pigment switching, it is now recognized that MC1R has non-pigmentary roles in antioxidant defenses and DNA-repair mechanisms [ 5961]. The cAMP pathway enhances melanocyte nucleotide excision repair (NER) activity, which operates by a  cut and patch  mechanism, to remove UV lesions. Activation of the MC1R by\x0b-MSH binding results in phosphorylation of the DNA damage sensors ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and Rad3 related (ATR), as well as in the recruitment of the xeroderma pigmentosum complementing proteins XPC (Group C) and XPA (Group A) [ 22]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Consistent with MC1R promoting DNA damage repair, impairment of the NER pathway in subjects carrying an MC1R loss-of function mutation has been observed. Additional non-pigmentation-related effects of MC1R can be attributed to the activation of MITF expression, which controls genes involved in DNA damage repair, chromosome stability, and centromere integrity [62]. Therapies involving defective MC1R signaling aim to restore its activities. Mouse mutants of MC1R have been characterized for years and can be used to evaluate therapies for better protection against UVR. Topical application of the cAMP permeable-inducer forskolin onto mice harboring loss-of-function mutations or haploinsufciency of Mc1re/e stimulated eumelanogenesis and induced UV-resistance [ 24,63]. These studies conrmed epidemiological studies suggesting that MC1R haploinsufciency increases mutagenic susceptibility to UVR and melanoma risk. Another therapeutic approach is to use MC1R agonists to increase pigmentation, antioxidant defense, and DNA repair. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 7, 'content': 'The best-known analogue is NDP-MSH, which is 100 times more potent than \x0b-MSH and is currently used to treat photosensitivity diseases, such as erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP). A very promising analog is the tripeptide (LK-514), which is >105times more selective for MC1R than other melanocortin receptors [ 64]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 8 of 39 2.2.3. The Wnt/Frizzled Receptor The Wnt (fusion of the words wingless and integrated) pathway is one of the most important signaling pathways during embryonic development and adult homeostasis and its deregulation has often been linked to cancer. Wnt proteins activate at least three different intracellular signaling pathways: the Wnt/ \x0c-catenin (or canonical), Wnt/Ca2+, and Wnt/planar cell polarity pathways [ 65,66]. The type of Wnt protein secreted determines which of these three signaling cascades is activated. The Wnt family contains at least 19 secreted cysteine-rich glycoproteins in humans [ 67,68]. Wnt proteins bind to target cells via two families of receptors: the seven transmembrane receptors Frizzled ( Fzd) and LDL-receptor-related proteins. The Frizzled (FZDs) receptors are comprised of ten members (FZD1FZD10), most of which are coupled to the \x0c-catenin (bcat) canonical signaling pathway. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The Wnt/\x0c-catenin pathway is essential for melanocyte development from NCCs [ 69]. The ligands Wnt1 and Wnt3a are required for the specication, expansion, and differenti- ation of melanoblasts from NCCs [ 70,71].\x0c-catenin itself has been directly implicated in melanoblast determination in several models, with varying effects depending on the tem- porality of its activation [ 72,73]. In mice, loss of bcat from pre-migratory NCCs (Wnt1::Cre; Ctnnb1ex2-6F/F) or melanoblasts (Tyr::Cre; Ctnnb1ex2-6F/F) induces the disappearance of melanoblasts [ 73,74]. The expression of a stabilized form of bcat (Tyr::bcat-mut-nls-egfp) leads to mice with a ventral white coat area associated with a defect in melanoblast migra- tion [ 75]. Various\x0c-catenin targets have been shown to be involved in cell proliferation and include the ubiquitous genes Myc and CyclinD1 and the melanocyte-specic gene Mitf-M. Only one member of the Frizzled family, FZD4, has been implicated in pigmentation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 8, 'content': 'FZD4 knockout (Fzd4tm1Nat) induced a depigmentation of coat color in addition to multiple defect in the nervous system [ 9]. FZD receptors are frequently overexpressed in tumor tissues relative to normal tissues and are potentially associated with a poor prognosis. No FZD overexpression has been directly linked to melanoma. Nevertheless, the FZD7 receptor was found to be upregulated in metastatis-derivative melanoma cell lines compared to the parental A375P cell line, with its expression associated with amoeboid invasion [ 26]. FZD7 knock-down reduces tumor growth after subcutaneous injection of the WM1361 melanoma cell line as well as metastasis formation after tail-vein injection of several melanoma cells in NSG mice [ 25,26]. OMP-18R5, a monoclonal antibody targeting several FZD including FZD7, is able to block tumor growth in xenograft mouse models for multiple cancers, but was not evaluated for melanoma [76]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Although little evidence implicates FZD receptors in melanomagenesis, studies of its associated signaling with \x0c-catenin clearly highlight a central role of this pathway in melanoma. Melanoma was one of the rst cancers in which CTNNB1 mutations were identied. In mouse models, the activation of WNT/ \x0c-catenin signaling participates in the initiation of melanomagenesis but is not, alone, sufcient for initiation. Expression of a stabilized mutated bcat in melanocytes, along with a mutated human NRAS oncogene, constitutively activating the MAPK pathway ( Tyr::NRASQ61K/\x0e;Tyr::bcat-mut/\x0e) led to accelerated onset and increased the number of melanomas in a mouse model [ 77]. This property has been linked to the increased immortalization of melanocytes in vitro by the repression of p16 expression. In a BrafV600E; Pten-/-; bcat-null-KO ( Tyr::CreERT2-Bos;BrafCA; PtenF/F;Ctnnb1ex2-6F/F) mouse model, in which \x0c-catenin is inactivated, the occurrence of melanoma is strongly delayed relative to that in a BrafV600E; Pten-/-model [ 78]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 8, 'content': 'In a BrafV600E; Pten-/-; bcat ( Tyr::CreERT2-Bos;BrafCA; PtenF/F;Ctnnb1ex3F/F) mouse model, in which bcat is activated, the occurrence of melanoma is accelerated [ 78]. In mouse models of BrafV600E, Pten-/-, and NRASQ61Rmelanoma, bcat activation increases the number of lung metastases, whereas bcat inactivation decreases the number of lymph-node and lung metastases [ 75,78]. In conclusion, the activation of \x0c-catenin increases both the initiation and progression of melanoma in mouse models. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 9 of 39 2.2.4. Glutamate Receptors (GRM1, GRM3 and GRM5) Glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the human central nervous system, where it plays a critical role in intercellular communication. Glutamate receptors are also expressed in tissues outside of the nervous system and are involved in the modulation of various normal and pathological processes. The glutamate receptor family is divided into two major groups: ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) and metabotropic glutamate receptors (Grms). The Grm1s belong to the class C family of GPCRs, characterized by a large, globular, extracellular ligand-binding domain. The Grm1 family consists of eight members (Grm1-8), which are organized by sequence homology, signaling effectors, and general localization. Group I Grms, consisting of Grm1 and Grm5, are multi-coupling receptors that can signal through both the G \x0bqand G\x0bi/opathways. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Group II Grms consist of Grm2 and Grm3 and couple to the G \x0bi/opathway. Group III Grms consist of Grm4, Grm6, Grm7, and Grm8 and couple to G \x0bi/osignaling pathways. Three members of the metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1, mGluR5, mGluR3) have been clearly identied as regulators of melanomagenesis (see [82] for review). The involvement of metabotropic glutamate receptors in melanomagenesis was ini- tially revealed by chance in a complex study using insertional mutagenesis, leading to aberrant expression of Grm1. Surprisingly, the mouse developed metastatic melanoma, whereas Grm1 is not detected in normal melanocytes in mice [ 83]. Conrming this ini- tial observation, transgenic mice containing Grm1 under the control of the Dct promoter (Dct::Grm1) developed melanoma with 100% penetrance [ 12]. Initially, no distant organ metastases were observed but disseminated cells were later detected in distant organs, such as the lung and liver [ 28]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The importance of Grm1 on tumor growth in vivo was supported by the decrease in growth induced by Grm1 knock-down in xenografted cells [ 84]. A conditional transgenic model using the tetracycline-regulated system to express mGluR1 in adulthood demonstrated that Grm1 expression is required not only for the initiation of melanoma but also for its progression in vivo [85]. The gene encoding the human receptor (GRM1 ) is altered in melanoma by point mutations, amplication, and/or deletions. In humans, GRM1 expression is not detected in normal melanocytes but it is expressed in 80% of metastatic melanoma or cell lines. Works from the laboratory of S. Chen showed that GRM1 expression results from activation of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways, the main pathways activated in melanoma [ 82,86,87]. Melanomas expressing GRM1 show elevated levels of glutamate in the tumor microenvironment, contributing to hyperactivation of the receptor and its downstream effectors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The identication of this autocrine loop be- tween GRM1 expression and the secretion of glutamate led to clinical trials to test riluzole, known to reduce glutamate release and thus reduce activation of the receptor. Despite being efcient in mice, no objective responses were observed in humans [ 88,89]. Recently, the secretion of glutamate by melanoma cells has been associated with an increased glu- taminolysis due to aberrant expression of glutaminase. Co-inhibition of glutaminolysis and GRM1 have proven to be efcient in decreasing melanoma xenograft growth in vivo [90]. This co-treatment remains to be tested in the clinic. Furthermore, riluzole monotherapy showed more immune cell inltrates in stable disease patients than those with progressive disease, suggesting that combining riluzole with immune checkpoint blockade therapy could enhance the efcacy of either agent alone. However, this has not yet been tested. In contrast to Grm1, Grm5 is normally expressed in both normal melanocytes and melanoma tumors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Transgenic mice overexpressing Grm5 (Tyrp1-Grm5 ) present with multi- ple melanoma located on the tail, with 100% penetrance and metastases, demonstrating that Grm5 drives melanoma initiation and progression [ 30]. Of note, mice with Grm1 orGrm5 melanoma both exhibit tumor formation on the hairless skin, including the pinnae and tails, rather than on trunk areas, as observed for BRAFV600Eand NRASQ61Kinduced melanoma, suggesting that the origin of the transformed cell may not be identical (epidermal vs. hair follicle). No information concerning GRM5 in humans is available. Exon capture sequencing of 734 GPCRs in malignant melanoma showed that a third glutamate receptor, GRM3 , is frequently mutated in human melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 10 of 39 of the same mutations (G18E/R, M518I) in multiple individuals suggests that these muta- tions may be drivers of the oncogenic process. GRM3 mutants selectively regulate the phosphorylation of MEK, leading to increased anchorage-independent growth and migra- tion [ 29]. Mutated GRM3 cells are more sensitive to MEK inhibitors. To date, no transgenic models with GRM3 mutants to study its effect on cellular transformation and sensitivity to MEK inhibitors have been developed. GRM3 mutants may contribute to melanoma- genesis through cross talk between the cAMP and MAPK signaling pathways [ 91]. The misexpression of two other glutamate receptors, GRM4 andGRM8 , has been detected in melanoma, but their precise role has not yet been clearly demonstrated [ 82]. Over 60% of human melanomas express Grm , indicating the importance of glutamatergic signals in this type of tumor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 10, 'content': 'It appears that glutamate receptors are not only involved in neuronal signaling and neuronal disorders but also in the transformation of the originating neural crest-derived cells, melanocytes, into melanoma. Note that other NCC derivatives express GRMs. As an example, GRM1 is expressed in chromafn cells of the adrenal medulla and GRM5 is expressed in the Meckelian cartilage [ 92,93]. However, no other NCC derivatives transformed by glutamatergic signaling have been reported so far. The GPCRs that are cited in the next paragraphs (PAR1, CXCR4, CCR7, CCR10 and GPER1) have been implicated in melanomagenesis. However, their functional role in melanoma initiation and in an immunocompetent environment have not been studied. 2.2.5. PAR1 The protease-activated receptors (PARs) are a family of GPCRs comprised of four members (PAR14) involved in the regulation of various cellular processes, including inammation and coagulation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Cleavage of PAR1 (also known as the thrombin receptor) by thrombin activates the receptor and downstream signaling through multiple heterotrimeric G-proteins such as G \x0bq, G\x0bi/0, and G\x0b12/13 . In turn, the MAPK and PI3-K signaling path- ways are activated, along with phospholipase C- \x0c(PLC-\x0c). Elevated PAR-1 expression during melanoma progression has been suggested to promote key processes that contribute to melanoma metastasis. Targeting PAR-1 reduced tumor growth and the metastases of melanoma cells in xenograft experiments [ 31]. Overexpression of PAR-1, as well as the con- tinuous activation of thrombin, promotes the upregulation of genes involved in adhesion, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis [ 94]. As PAR-1 signaling affects both melanoma cells and their microenvironment, it was considered to be an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of melanoma patients. However therapeutic trials were not continued in melanoma due to the activity of PAR1 in coagulation. 2.2.6. Chemokine Receptors (CXCR4, CCR7, CCR10) Chemokine receptors belong to the GPCR family and are classied into four groups, CXCR, CCR, XCR, and CX3CR. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Each receptor can bind to several chemokines. A variety of chemokine receptors are expressed on the surface of both immune and tumor cells. Expression of CXCR4 ,CCR7 andCCR10 on the surface of melanoma cells is associated with a poor prognosis [ 95]. Aside from their critical role in the immune response, chemokines and their receptors have been studied for their capacity to guide cancer cells to specic organs. Chemokines have chemotactic properties and can attract melanoma cells expressing their corresponding receptors. High concentrations of CXCL12, the ligand of CXCR4, are produced in the lungs and injected CXCR4-expressing B16 melanoma cells are able to efciently colonize the lung. Such colonization is reduced in the presence of T22, a specic inhibitor of CXCR4 [ 32]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 10, 'content': 'In addition, a commercially available dermal ller, hyaluronic acid (HA)-based gel, loaded with CXCL12 was able to recruit and trap CXCR4- expressing B16 melanoma cells injected into mice, consequently leading to a reduction in lung metastases [ 33]. One hundred and thirty-eight (138) clinical trials with CXCR4 inhibitors are being/have been performed, none of which include(d) melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 11 of 39 using a specic antibody [ 34,35,95]. However, most of these experiments used mouse B16 melanoma cells, which are not necessarily the best representation of human melanoma. The effect of the various chemokines on the immune response is not discussed here. 2.2.7. G-Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor 1 (GPER1) There are three estrogen receptors, two nuclear receptors, ER \x0band ER\x0c, that act mainly as transcription regulators, and the G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 ( GPER1 = GPER = GPR30), that can induce rapid, non-genomic estrogen signaling [ 96]. GPER1 coupled with G \x0bsprotein induces the cAMP pathways. Using various mouse models, GPER1 has been shown to play pleiotropic functions particular in the endocrine, immune, cardiovascular and central nervous systems. In these mice, no pigmentary phenotype has been observed. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 11, 'content': 'The impact of estrogen in melanomagenesis is still controversial since multiple genetic and environmental factors can greatly inuence the development of this cancer and its severity. Nevertheless, Natale at al., propose that repeated pregnancies inhibit the growth of BRAF-driven human melanocytic neoplasia in xenografts and that GPER1 signaling promotes cell differentiation instead of proliferation, inhibiting tumor development [ 27]. Furthermore, in this study, GPER1 signaling rendered melanoma cells more vulnerable to immunotherapy. These results led to the initiation of a clinical trial targeting GPER1 and anti-PD1 immunotherapies (Phase I/IIA trials: NCT04130516). It should be pointed out that there is an notable controversy concerning the role of GPER1 as the principal mediator of the estrogen response in vivo , because even though nuclear receptors are less expressed in melanoma than GPER1 (Median level for GPER1 = 1.86; Er\x0b= 0.61; Er\x0c= 0.31Tpm according to TCGA data base), they have a higher afnity for 17\x0c-estradiol (GPER1 = 36 nM and ERs = 0.11 nM) [ 97]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 11, 'content': 'It is clear that the role of GPER1 in melanoma needs further investigation, particularly in physiologically relevant mouse melanoma models. Other GPCRs, namely GPR143, GPR161, SMO, which couple to G \x0bq, G\x0bsand Gli, respectively, have produced pigmentation phenotypes in mice, but have not been implicated in melanomagenesis [10,11,14]. 3. GPCR Associated Signaling in Melanoma The activation of GPCRs leads to the modulation of the activity of cellular signaling pathways, marked by the production of second messengers. The rst element of such signaling is the heterotrimeric G-proteins to which these receptors are coupled through their intracellular domain. These G-proteins consist of three subunits, G \x0b, G\x0c, and G\r[98]. The C-terminal subunit of the GPCR is responsible for the selectivity of receptor/G-protein binding [ 98,99]. The G subunit is also responsible for the selectivity of downstream signal- ing pathways [ 100]. There are a total of 17 G \x0bsubunits grouped into four subfamilies: G \x0bs, G\x0bi/0, G\x0bq/11, and G\x0b12/13 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 11, 'content': 'GPCRs generally couple to a specic G-protein but may interact with several different G-proteins [ 56,101]. Coupling appears to be cell-dependent. Thus, a careful analysis of the downstream signaling is required for each cell type. Binding of a ligand to its GPCR causes a conformational change in the GPCR that is transmitted to the G \x0bsubunit, which exchanges its GDP to a GTP molecule. The binding of GTP induces the dissociation of G \x0b from the G\x0c-G\rsubunits of the receptor. This dimer then modulates the activity of other intracellular proteins [ 98]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 12 of 39 C2 C1 WNT LRP5/6cAMP  Signaling DAG/IP3 G12/13 G / G Wnt/-cat -arrestin Gi/0 Coupled GPCRGs Coupled GPCRGq/1 1 Coupled GPCRG12/13 Coupled GPCRGPCR FZD GPCRGPCRs ACDY Gi/0    cAMP M1M2 GsGq/1 1  G12/13G GRKDVL EPAC RAP1PKAATP RRRR CC C P PC PDE4DCREB CREB CREB CRE MITFMAPK pathway Hippo pathwayRASGRP3PKCRhoGEF RhoA RAC FAK LATS1/2 YAP1 YAP1 TEADGene regulationGene regulation BRAFNRAS MEK1/2 ERK1/2PCa2+DAGPLCPIP2 IP3 Ca2+Axin APC PI3K AKT MITF-M-catenin -catenin -catenin LEF/TCFGSK3 PPPP -arrestin-arrestin MAPK1 MAPK2MAPK3 CYR61egeg Figure 1. GPCR signaling pathways. Note that the G \x0bq/11 et G\x0b12/13 G-proteins share a common downstream signaling intermediateYAP1. 3.1. Signaling via cAMP The induction of MC1R by its ligand activates the cAMP pathway, whereas the induc- tion of GRM1, GRM3 and GRM5, CXCR4, CCR4, CCR7, and CCR10 represses this pathway. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 12, 'content': 'cAMP was the rst second messenger to be discovered and regulates many downstream cellular processes [ 102,103]. Two classes of G subunits modulate intracellular cAMP levels, G\x0bsand G\x0bi/0, with diametrically opposite effects [ 100,104]. The enzyme responsible for cAMP production, adenylate cyclase (ADCY), is a membrane-associated enzyme that converts ATP to cAMP [ 104,105]. The difference between G \x0bsand G\x0bi/0is due to the difference in the binding domain on the adenylyl cyclase: members of the G \x0bsfamily bind to the C2 intracellular domain of the adenylyl cyclase, which then activates its enzymatic activity, ultimately leading to an increase in intracellular cAMP levels [ 106]. Conversely, members of the G \x0bi/0family bind to the C1 intracellular domain of the adenylyl cyclase, thereby inhibiting its activity. The heterotrimeric G-protein subfamily G \x0bsis composed of three members: G \x0bsand G\x0bsxl, two splice variants of the GNAS gene, and G\x0bolf, encoded by the GNAL gene [ 100]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Only G\x0bsis expressed in melanocytes and melanoma [ 107] and is activated by an associated receptor, such as the MC1R [ 108]. Gain-of-function mutations of GNAS are clustered at amino acids R201 and Q227, located in the GTPase activity pocket. These mutations induce the loss of intrinsic GTPase activity and maintain the G \x0bsprotein in an activated state. Mutations of GNAS are frequently found in various tumors of the pancreas, kidney, and stomach, but are more anecdotal in melanoma, affecting less than 1% of cases [ 109,110]. More strikingly, the GNAS T393C SNP polymorphism is associated with tumor progression in metastatic melanoma [ 111], as well as in other cancers, such as colorectal or bladder cancer [ 112,113]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 13 of 39 process has not been evaluated. However, this observation suggests that G \x0bsinactivation favors melanoma progression. The G\x0bi/0heterotrimeric G-protein subfamily is composed of eight members: G \x0bi1, G\x0bi2, G\x0bi3, G\x0b0, G\x0bz, G\x0bt-r, G\x0bt-c, and G\x0bgust. However, only G\x0bi1,G\x0bi2, and G\x0bi3are expressed in melanocytes and melanoma, and are encoded by GNAI1-3, respectively [100,110,114,115] . Gain-of-function mutations of GNAI2 are clustered at amino acids R179 and T182 and lead to constitutive activation of the G \x0bi2subunit by increasing its GTP binding capacity [ 116,117]. GNAI2 is mostly involved in cell injury and inflammatory responses but these activating mutations can lead to tumors, depending on the cellular context, due to increased MAPK activity . G\x0bi2R179 and T182 mutations are found in 1.4% of melanoma patients [ 110] but their impact on melanomagenesis has not yet been evaluated. G\x0bsand G\x0bi/0directly regulate adenylate cyclase. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 13, 'content': 'There are ten (10) enzymes encoded by ten (10) different ADCY1-10 genes [ 118,119]. All are membrane bound via their two series of six transmembrane helices (TM1 and TM2), followed by a cytoplasmic domain (C1 and C2, respectively). Only ADCY10, which is soluble, differs from the others, as its activation is GPCR independent, being activated by bicarbonate and calcium [ 120]. Most adenylate cyclases are expressed in melanoma, with the exception of ADCY5 and ADCY8 [ 110,115]. The expression of ADCY10 is unclear because, although teams have found the protein by IHC, databases suggest that the mRNA is absent [ 110,121]. It has been shown that metastatic melanomas express more ADCY1 mRNA than primary melanomas and that a high level of ADCY1 expression correlates with a poorer prognosis [122]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Consistent with this observation, the silencing of ADCY1 in vitro in mucosal melanoma cell lines decreases the ability of cells to form clones in a colony-formation assay, as well as their migratory and invasive capacity [ 123]. In xenograft experiments, decreased ADCY1 expression decreased subcutaneous cell growth as well as colonization of the lung after the injection of melanoma cells into the tail vein of NOD/SCID mice [ 123]. More generally, stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity by forskolin promotes tumor growth in the BrafCA/Pten\x00/\x00 melanoma mouse model, whereas its pharmacological inhibition by SQ22536 leads to a decrease in tumor growth in a MAPK pathway-independent manner [ 124,125]. However, treatment of human primary and metastatic melanoma cell lines with SQ22536, even at high concentrations, does not alter cell survival. This implies that the targeting of transmembrane adenylate cyclase is not a feasible therapeutic strategy on its own. Adenylate cyclase activity is also involved in resistance to MAPK inhibitors. Indeed, treating BRAFV600Emelanoma cells with forskolin increases ADCY9 expression and cAMP synthesis, leading to greater resistance to MAPK inhibition [126]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 13, 'content': 'The intracellular concentration of cAMP is negatively regulated by phosphodiesterases (PDEs), which hydrolyze cAMP to AMP , thus controlling the amplitude and duration of the signal. There are 11 families of PDEs (PDE1-11) encoded by a total of 21 different genes [ 127]. Specic PDE isoforms are located in different subcellular compartments, where they regulate cAMP levels. Indeed, cAMP does not freely diffuse across the cell but is rather produced in subcellular compartments. This feature has important consequences, allowing only appropriate targets to be activated in microdomains [128]. In melanocytes, phosphodiesterase 4 (PD4E), more specically its variant PD4ED3, is a direct target of MC1R-cAMP signaling, constituting a negative feedback mechanism [ 129]. Blocking PDE4D3 activity in conjunction with forskolin treatment can efciently restore cAMP levels and pigmentation in MC1Re/emice. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 13, 'content': 'In melanoma, the expression of numerous PDEs has been reported and their effect was initially shown on cell proliferation [ 130,131]. Their specic functions in BRAF or NRAS-mutated melanoma highlight the connection between the cAMP and MAPK pathways (see below). The overexpression of PDE4 and, therefore, the inhibition of cAMP signaling is critical for MAPK activation by oncogenic RAS in melanoma [ 131,132]. In BRAF-mutated melanoma, the inhibition of PDE4 activity by pharmacological inhibitors or RNA interference decreases melanoma cell invasion by interacting with the focal adhesion kinase FAK [ 133]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 14 of 39 expression and a tumor-promoting effect [ 130]. PDE4D expression is elevated in advanced melanoma and negatively associated with survival. More generally, inhibiting cAMP signaling through the expression of PDEs (PDE1, PDE2, PDE4, and PDE8) is associated with the oncogenic progression in melanoma [ 128]. Whether PDE inhibitors can prevent proliferation, invasion, and/or migration in melanoma needs to be evaluated in the future. The rst and main target of cAMP is protein kinase A (PKA) [ 100,134]. PKA is a serine/threonine kinase composed of four subunits: two regulatory and two catalytic. There are four isoforms for both the regulatory ( RI\x0b,RI\x0c,RII\x0b, and RII\x0c) and catalytic subunits ( C\x0b,C\x0c,C\r, and PRKX ), with each isoform showing individual localization and specicity. In humans, all are expressed, but only C \ris expressed in melanocytes and melanomas [ 135]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Theoretically, since RIs cannot interact with RIIs, a maximum of 36 combinations can be generated between regulatory and catalytic subunits. At this point, specic combinations have not been characterized in melanocytes or melanomas. Binding of cAMP to the regulatory subunits induces their dissociation from the cat- alytic units, which become active and phosphorylate downstream targets [ 136]. More than 70% of patients with familial Carney complex, an autosomal dominant skin con- dition associated with spotty pigmentation [ 137], carry three mutations associated with pathogenic features (82C>T, 491_492 delTG, c.709-2_709-7 delATTTTT) in the PRKAR1A gene, which encodes the RI \x0bsubunit [ 138]. This mutation induces a dominant-negative action of the regulatory subunit and in consequence a constitutive activation of the catalytic subunit of PKA. Inactivating mutations of PRKAR1A lead to constitutive activation of the cAMP-PKA pathway through the loss of regulation of the catalytic subunits of PKA. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 14, 'content': 'In melanoma, mutations are found in 1.4% of cases, as well as loss of heterozygosity in 11.8% of patients [ 110]. Furthermore, loss of function of PRKAR1A is found in epithelioid pigmented melanocytomas, a rare intermediate/borderline form of melanoma [ 139]. By comparing PKA activity in primary and metastatic melanoma cells, Beebe and colleagues suggested that PKA activity is higher in melanoma metastases [ 140]. The pharmacological inhibition of PKA induces the growth and invasion of melanoma cells [141]. A large number of cytosolic and nuclear proteins have been identied as substrates for PKA [ 102]. Importantly, PKA is located at the crossroads between cAMP and MAPK/ERK. Constitutive activation of cAMP leads to the phosphorylation and inactivation of CRAF by PKA in melanoma [ 131]. CRAF is important in maintaining activation of the MAPK path- way in RAS-mutated cancers because ERK1/2 has a negative feedback action through the phosphorylation of BRAF, which causes its inhibition [ 131,132,142]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 14, 'content': 'As a consequence, acti- vation of MAPK pathways through CRAF requires that the cAMP pathway in melanoma cells be inactivated to release cAMP-mediated inhibition of CRAF. PKA can also directly phosphorylate BRAF on serine 365, dissociating the RAS/BRAF/KSR complex and thus ac- tivating BRAF [ 143]. The catalytic C \x0bsubunit renders BRAFV600Emelanoma cells resistant to MAPK inhibitors [ 126]. The CRTC3 protein, a co-activator of CREB that is phosphory- lated and activated by PKA and ERK [ 144], lies at the interface between signaling through the cAMP and MAPK pathways. A knockout mouse model for Crct3 showed graying of the coat due to defects in melanocyte maturation [ 144]. Mutations in CRCT3 have been identied in 23% of human melanomas, most leading to an increase in its expression and activity and reduced patient survival [ 144]. Thus, CRT3 inhibition could be benecial for such patients. The regulation of transcription by PKA is mainly achieved by the phosphorylation of CREB. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 14, 'content': 'CREB phosphorylation leads to dimerization of this transcription factor and its sub- sequent binding to cAMP response elements (CRE) in target genes and its interaction with transcription co-activators, such as CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300. CRE binding sites are located in the promoter regions of many genes, including the master melanocyte regulator MITF [ 51,145]. MITF regulates numerous major cellular processes essential for melanogenesis and melanomagenesis, including pigmentation, growth, survival, migration, and invasion [ 52]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 15 of 39 The inhibition of CREB in melanoma cell lines was shown to decrease metastasis forma- tion after injection into the tail veins of mice [ 147,148]. This loss of metastatic potential can be explained, at least in part, by the loss of the expression of the metalloproteinase MMP2 and the adhesion molecule MCAM/MUC18. Surprisingly, CREB, which generally acts as a transactivator, negatively regulates the transcription factor AP2 \x0band the gene encoding cellular communication network factor 1 (CCN1/CYR61). In early publications, these two genes were considered to be tumor suppressor genes in melanoma but more recent studies have proposed that AP2 \x0band CCN1 facilitate melanoma progression [149151] . The RNA-editing enzyme adenosine deaminase acting on RNA1 (ADAR1) has been re- cently identied as a new target of CREB. Silencing ADAR1 enhances the invasiveness of melanoma cells [ 152]. CREB has been associated with resistance to MAPK inhibitors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Phospho-CREB is restored in relapsing melanomas previously treated by MAPK inhibitors, possibly by the up-regulation of adipocyte enhancer-binding protein 1, AEBP1 [126,153]. The second major target of cAMP is the cAMP-activated exchange protein ( EPAC ) [154]. EPAC is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for small GTPases, e.g., RAP1 (Ras- related protein 1). Activation of RAP1 occurs through the exchange of GDP for GTP [102,154] . The consequences of EPAC activation on the growth of melanoma are still unclear and reports are conicting. Indeed, pharmacological activation of EPAC using an EPAC- specic cAMP analog increases the growth of HMG cells [ 155] but has no effect on PMP melanoma [ 141]. The use of shRNA targeting Rap1 increases the growth and survival of cells derived from primary but not metastatic melanomas [ 124]. The current hypoth- esis is that the EPAC-Rap1 pathway is anti-proliferative in metastatic melanoma and pro-proliferative in primary melanoma [156]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 15, 'content': 'The last major effectors of cAMP are the cAMP-dependent ion channels: the cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel (CNG) and the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide- gated channel (HCN) [ 154,157]. These channels are relatively nonselective cation channels and have not yet been studied in melanoma. 3.2. Signaling via Inositol Triphosphate and Diacylglycerol The induction of EDNRB and PAR1 by its ligand activates the IP3/DAG pathway. It has to be noted that GRM1 and GRM5 induce the IP3/DAG pathway, but repress the cAMP pathway. Cellular levels of IP3 and DAG are highly regulated by the stimulation of GPCRs of the G\x0bq/11class. This class contains four members: G \x0bq, G\x0b11, G\x0b14, and G\x0b16[100]. All can be expressed in melanocytes and melanoma but only G \x0bqand G\x0b11are highly expressed in these cells [ 110,115]. Activation of the receptor induces the exchange of GDP bound to the alpha subunit for GTP , resulting in activation of this subunit. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Mutations affecting G-proteins of the G \x0bq/11 class are almost systematically found in uveal melanoma. Approximately 90% of metastatic uveal melanomas are mutated for G \x0bqor G\x0b11, affecting mainly glutamine 209 in both proteins, but also, to a lesser extent, arginine 183 [158,159] . GNAQ , which encodes G \x0bq, is mutated in 50 to 85% of non-epithelial melanocytic lesions, in- cluding blue nevi and leptomeningeal melanocytic neoplasms. Mutations in GNA11 , which encodes G\x0b11, are more frequent in uveal melanomas [ 160]. These mutations are found at lower frequencies (~16%) in other types of cutaneous melanoma [ 110,161]. Q209L/P and R183C/Q mutations in GNAQ or GNA11 affect the GTPase domain [ 162] but only Q209L/P mutations have actually been characterized. These mutations reduce the GTPase activity of the G \x0bqsubunit and cause hyperactive signaling [ 162]. Regardless of the tumor context, the mutations are mutually exclusive [ 158] and are also mutually exclusive with BRAF and NRAS mutations. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Of note, in uveal melanoma, mutations of CYSLTR2 (L129G), encoding a G \x0bq/11-coupled GPCR, are found in a mutually exclusive manner with G \x0bq and G\x0b11mutations in approximately 3% of patients. This mutation is also present in blue nevi [ 158,163]. This CYSLTR2L129Gmutation constitutively activates the receptor and thus downstream signaling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 16 of 39 dermal melanoma to malignant uveal melanomas with lung invasion [ 164,165]. Similarly, postnatal expression of G \x0b11Q209Lin melanocytes induces hyperpigmented melanocytic lesions in the uveal tract, skin, and leptomeninges that progress to melanoma with lung invasion [ 166]. Mice transplanted under the skin with G \x0bq mutated melanoma cells show inhibition of MAPK signaling and tumor growth following treatment with FR900359 [ 167]. To date, the inhibition of uveal melanoma with FR900359 appears to be more potent than inhibition with YM254890 [ 168]. The activation of G \x0bq/11 is a mechanism of resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition through the overexpression of c-Jun [ 169]. These data are con- sistent with the gain in resistance to MAPK inhibitors shown by activation of EDNRB [ 170]. Conversely, inhibition of G \x0bqby YM-254890 resulted in inhibition of MAPK signaling, with evidence of a rebound after 24 h in xenograft experiments of uveal melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Combined treatment with YM-254890 and a MEK inhibitor led to sustained MAPK inhibition and tumor shrinkage [ 171]. A combination of PKC and MEK1 inhibitors is currently under clinical evaluation for solid tumors harboring GNAQ/11 mutations or PRKS fusions (Phase I/II trials: NCT03947385). The primary target of G \x0bq/11 subunits is phospholipase C beta (PLC \x0c) [172174]. This subfamily is encoded by four genes ( PLCB1-4 ) encoding seven proteins, all of which have two isoforms, except PLC \x0c3 [175]. All PLC\x0cs are likely expressed in cutaneous melanoma [ 110], whereas, only the PLCB2-4 genes are expressed in uveal melanoma [ 158]. PLC\x0cs function by hydrolyzing membrane phosphatidylinositol-4,5-biphosphates (PIP2) into IP3 and DAG [ 176]. PLCB4 mutations occur in approximately 5% of uveal melanoma and are mutually exclusive with GNAQ ,GNA11 , and CYSLTR2 mutations [ 177]. PLC\x0c4D630Y mutations affect the Y domain of the catalytic core of PLC4 [ 177]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Their effect has not been precisely studied, but their exclusivity with the GNAQ ,GNA11 , and CYSLTR2 mutations and PLC\x0c4 being downstream of these proteins suggest that PLC \x0c4 mutations have a simi- lar effect on the oncogenicity of uveal melanomas [ 177]. Outside the context of melanoma, the other PLCs have often been shown to induce migration and/or to reduce the immune response [178,179]. One of the two secondary messengers produced by PLCs is DAG, which remains anchored in the membrane. Phorbol esters, such as 12-O-tetradeconoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), are synthetic analogues of DAG. TPA is essential for melanocyte growth in vitro [180182]. Interestingly, the effect of TPA on the proliferation of melanoma cell lines appears to be cell dependent [ 118,181,183185]. PMA increases cell survival, invasion, and resistance to anoikis [ 184,186,187]. TPA and PMA activate the PKC and MAPK pathways [ 184]. The other secondary messenger produced by PLCs is IP3. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 16, 'content': 'The binding of IP3 to the IP3 receptor (IP3R) increases intracellular Ca2+levels [ 188]. Calcium release induced by IP3 supports melanoma cell migration and invasion [189191]. DAG and calcium activate protein kinase C by binding to the C1 and C2 domains of PKC, respectively [ 192]. There are nine genes that encode PKC: PKC \x0b, PKC\x0c, PKC\r, PKC\x0e, PKC\x12, PKC", PKC\x11, PKC\x13, and PKC\x10[192]. They are divided into three classes according to their activation mechanism. The classical PKCs (cPKCs) consist of PKC \x0b, PKC\x0c, and PKC\rand are activated by calcium and DAGs. The novel PKCs (nPKCs) (PKC\x0e, PKC\x12, PKC", PKC\x11) are activated by DAGs alone. Atypical PKCs (aPKCs) (PKC \x13 and PKC\x10) are not activated by calcium or DAGs [ 192]. At least one PKC from each class is expressed in melanoma cells, except PKC \r[110,192]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 16, 'content': 'PKC activity is regulated by the presence of their substrates and cofactors and their recruitment by scaffolding proteins, such as receptor for activated kinases C (RACK) or protein kinase A scaffolding protein 5 (AKAP5) [ 193196]. PKC regulates invasion of melanoma cells but the various members have different effects: PKC \x0band PKC\x0einduce melanoma migration, invasion, and lung colonization [ 197]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 17 of 39 been evaluated [ 110,196]. Similarly, the effect of PKC on cell growth is dependent on the isotype [200202]. Among the targets of PKC is Ras guanine-releasing protein 3 (RASGRP3), a gua- nine nucleotide exchange factor for RAS family proteins [ 166,200]. PKC phosphorylates RASGRP3 on Thr 133, which contributes to its activation in conjunction with DAG bind- ing [ 203205]. The inhibition of RASGRP3 induces the loss of GTP binding to RAS and thus its activity [ 166,200]. This decrease in activity is accompanied by a decrease in MAPK pathway activity and is associated with a decrease in cell proliferation [ 166]. This molecular mechanism may explain the activation of the MAPK pathway seen after PKC activa- tion [ 86,206208]. PKC"and PKC\x11are able to shunt the pharmacological inhibition of BRAFV600E, rendering melanoma cells resistant to these drugs [ 209]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Consistent with this nding, the use of PKC inhibitors inhibits the survival and migration of melanoma cells resistant to vemurafenib [210]. The activity of Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) is positively regulated by many GPCRs but negatively regulated by the Hippo pathway [ 211,212]. In uveal melanoma, YAP1 is activated by G \x0bq, inducing cell growth and survival [ 164,213,214]. Inhibition of YAP activ- ity by verteporn reduces tumor growth [ 213,214]. G\x0bqactivates the guanine nucleotide exchange factor TRIO, which in turn activates the small GTPases RhoA and Rac1 [ 213,215]. This likely has a dual action: (i) the activation of FAK, which in turn inhibits the LATS1/2 kinase of the Hippo pathway, inactivating the action of YAP1, and (ii) the direct activa- tion of YAP1 by releasing the angiomotin transcription factor (AMOT) [ 213,216]. In uveal melanoma, the activation of Rho and Rac is linked to the activation of the MAP kinases JNK & p38 [ 215]. JNK and p38 phosphorylate c-Jun and induce the expression of AP-1 targets [ 217]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Phosphorylation of c-Jun induces cell proliferation via AP1 targets that reg- ulate the cell cycle, such as cyclin D1, p53, p21cip1/Waf1, p19ARF, and p16 [ 217220]. Activation of p38 and JNK are likely to be involved in mechanisms of resistance to MAPK inhibitors [ 218,219]. In cutaneous melanoma, the activation of YAP1 is required for cell invasion [ 221224], as well as viability and resistance to anoikis [ 221,222,224]. Although the effect of YAP1 on invasion is clearly documented, its effect on melanoma growth is still debated [ 221,223]. YAP1 activity has also been shown to be associated with cell migration via regulation of the arp2/3 complex 3 [ 221,225]. The invasive phenotype of melanoma cells has been correlated with the activation signature of YAP [ 223].In vivo , YAP1 activation induces the formation of very large numbers of metastases in the lungs after the injection of cells carrying the activating mutation of YAP1-5SA under the skin of mice [ 223]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Lung colonization after the injection of cells into the tails of mice also decreases when YAP1 levels are genetically decreased [ 222,224]. Most interestingly, inhibition of the Hippo pathway replicates this effect, favoring lung colonization [ 226]. The pro-invasive action of YAP1 is mediated through the transcription of a number of its targets, such as CCN1, AXL, and THBS1 [ 223]. These targets are well known in melanoma. AXL expression is associated with tumor growth and cell invasion and migration and has also been shown to be associated with resistance to MAPK inhibitors [ 227229]. CCN1 has been shown to be associated with increased metastatic potential and angiogenesis [ 150,230]. Genetic inhibition of THBS1 is associated with decreased cell invasion [ 231,232]. YAP1 requires the transcriptional cofac- tors TEAD1-4 to bind to its targets. Genetic inhibition of TEAD1-4 recapitulates the in vitro effects of YAP1 on invasion, with a clear decrease in the invasive capacity of melanoma cells [ 233]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 17, 'content': 'TEAD1-4 are also involved in resistance to MAPK inhibitors and inhibition of all four TEADs sensitizes cells to these inhibitors [233]. 3.3. Signaling via G a12/13 The induction of PAR1 by its ligand activates G \x0b12/13 . It has to be noted that PAR1 induces both the IP3/DAG and G \x0b12/13 pathways. The third major pathway of GPCR signaling involved in melanoma is the pathway involving G \x0b12/13 [100]. This class of G subunits has two members, G \x0b12and G\x0b13, encoded by the GNA12 andGNA13 genes, respectively. The expression of these genes is ubiquitous [ 100,110,115]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 18 of 39 subunits activates Rho-GEFs, such as leukemia-associated Rho-GEF (LARG) or p115 Rho- GEF [ 234,235]. Activation is achieved by the attachment of the G12/13 subunit to the RH domain of Rho-GEFs [ 236]. Once activated, Rho-GEFs induce RhoA activation [237240] . Rho is a converging point for G \x0b12/13 and G\x0bq/11 signaling [ 239]. Signaling induced downstream occurs through the activation of YAP1, as described above [ 212]. G\x0b12/13 signaling has been poorly analyzed in the context of melanoma. PAR1 and 2 receptors, coupled to G\x0b12/13 proteins, are expressed in melanoma [ 241]. Activation of PAR1 receptors by its ligand TRAP6 induces the activation of YAP1 in a HEK293A cell model [242]. YAP1 activation subsequently leads to activation of RhoA and inhibition of LATS1 [ 242]. Similar to G\x0bq/11 signaling, G\x0b12/13 signaling appears to increase invasion and migration while not altering cell growth [ 243,244]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 18, 'content': 'However, these results were obtained in breast and prostate cancer and need to be conrmed in melanoma. Of note, activation of LPA receptors (LPA1- LPA6), coupled to G 12/13 receptors, is still poorly documented in melanoma, although it has been reported to enhance chemoresistance and increase the survival of melanoma cells in vitro [245]. 3.4. Signaling via WNT/ b-Catenin The induction of FZD7 by its ligand activates the WNT/ \x0c-catenin signaling path- way. WNT ligands activate three intracellular pathways: the canonical WNT/ \x0c-catenin, WNT/Ca++and WNT/PCP . Only the canonical WNT/ \x0c-catenin pathway will be described in this chapter. WNT/Ca++corresponds to the G \x0bq/11 pathway already described in 3.2. and the WNT/PCP pathway has not been studied in melanoma. The WNT/\x0c-catenin pathway has been widely studied and reviewed. Here, we provide the current knowledge of this pathway in melanoma, especially through the activity of\x0c-catenin, which is encoded by CTNNB1 [68,246]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Mutations in the CTNNB1 gene are rare: around 3% in melanoma except for the deep penetrating nevus (DPN) that harbors 90% of activating mutations in CTNNB1 . As such, activated\x0c-catenin is a marker caracterizing this specic melanocytoma/melanoma type from other cutaneous melanocytic tumors [ 247,248]. However, cytoplasmic or nuclear localization of \x0c-catenin, indicating activation of the pathway by other mechanisms other than mutation in its gene, was found in 2030% of human melanoma [ 249,250]. The canonical WNT pathway is activated only in response to the formation of a complex containing WNT, FZD, and LRP . WNT proteins are difcult to purify in an active form and only a few antibodies are available for their detection. The WNT proteins most studied in the context of \x0c-catenin activation in melanocytes/melanoma are WNT1 and WNT3a. WNT5a has different roles and acts as an antagonist or agonist of the canonical WNT/ \x0c- catenin pathway, depending on the cellular context. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 18, 'content': 'WNT proteins are subject to post- translational modications, including glycosylation and lipid modications. Acylation on conserved serine and cysteine residues is required for WNT secretion and efcient binding to the Frizzled receptor [ 251,252]. In the basal state, Axin protein interacts through distinct domains with GSK-3, CK1 \x0b, APC, and\x0c-catenin and is considered to be the limiting component of the \x0c-catenin destruction complex [ 253,254]. Modulation of its levels would therefore be an effective way to regulate \x0c-catenin destruction. APC is a large protein that interacts with both \x0c-catenin and Axin. It contains three Axin-binding domains, interspaced between armadillo repeat domains (ARMs), which bind to \x0c-catenin.\x0c-catenin is sequentially phosphorylated by CK1 \x0band GSK-3 on serines (S) and a threonine (T) (S45, T41, S37, and S33) in the N-terminal region of the protein, resulting in its interaction with and ubiquitination by \x0c-TRCP1 before being degraded by the proteasome. Binding of the WNT ligand leads to the dimerization of Frizzled with the coreceptor LRP5/6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 18, 'content': 'This dimerization results in a conformational change of the receptors, leading to relocalization of the degradation complex to the cell membrane under the double inter- action of Axin with DVL (itself associated with Frizzled) and with the cytoplasmic end of LRP . Such membrane relocalization decreases the activity of the destruction complex, such that the amount of unphosphorylated cytoplasmic \x0c-catenin rapidly increases. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 19 of 39 stabilization of cytoplasmic \x0c-catenin results in an increase in nuclear \x0c-catenin. The balance between the amount of cytoplasmic and nuclear \x0c-catenin is dynamic, resulting from multiple mechanisms of transport and retention between the two compartments. In the nucleus, \x0c-catenin binds to the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF) family of transcription factors, which themselves are already associated with DNA. In the absence of \x0c-catenin, TCF factors interact with transcriptional co-repressors of the Groucho/transducin-like enhancer of split (TLE) family and repress the expression of their target genes. Nuclear accumulation of \x0c-catenin leads to the association of TCF with\x0c-catenin, resulting in dissociation from Groucho/TLE1 and allowing the recruitment of other coactivators for transcriptional activation through its C-terminal transcriptional activation domain. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Many transcription factors outside the TCF/LEF family of transcrip- tion factors have been reported to be capable of associating with \x0c-catenin to activate or repress transcription [ 255]. In addition, it has to be noted that alternative pathways activate \x0c-catenin independently of WNTs [256]. In melanocytes/melanoma, MITF interacts with \x0c-catenin and redirects \x0c-catenin- mediated transcriptional activity from canonical Wnt/ \x0c-target genes to specic MITF target genes to activate their transcription [ 257]. For instance, in mutated \x0c-catenin melanoblasts, stabilised form of \x0c-catenin increases Mitf-M levels, which may interfere with \x0c-catenin transactivation, inhibiting the activation of Myc and CyclinD1, therefore reducing prolif- eration [ 74]. During melanocyte establishment, \x0c-catenin and MITF-M levels are likely maintained within a very narrow range, with any reduction or increase, such as those observed in the bcat mutants, altering melanoblast proliferation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Other levels of cross- signaling between the WNT/ \x0c-catenin pathway and MITF have been described. For example, it has been shown that \x0c-catenin/TCF transcriptionally upregulates MITF-M expression [ 72]. It has also been shown that MITF-M binds to and upregulates its own pro- moter through a direct interaction with LEF1 [ 258]. It would appear to be difcult to target \x0c-catenin in melanoma without affecting MITF expression and/or activity. MITF could potentially be an attractive target for melanoma therapy but the drug-targeting of MITF is highly challenging. As mentioned already, MITF is considered to be the master gene of melanocyte differentiation and has an essential role in the proliferation, survival, senes- cence, migration, invasion, DNA repair, and metabolism of melanoma cells [ 53,259]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Mitf expression is regulated by multiple signaling pathways outside of the canonical Wnt/ \x0c- catenin pathway, such as the cAMP/CREB, YAP1/PAX3, TGF \x0c/GLI2, and TNF/NF \x14B pathways, and by transcription factors, such as SOX10 and BRN2, themselves regulated by multiple pathways in melanoma. The basic concept in melanoma is that the prolifera- tive and invasive states are dened, in part, by the high level/activity of MITF and low level/activity MITF, respectively. High and low MITF level/activity co-exist in melanoma tumors and the switch in MITF expression (high and low) is reversible and responsible for melanoma heterogeneity and plasticity. MITF is also involved in the resistance to BRAF inhibitors. One current view for the therapeutic strategy is to increase MITF levels and therefore those of melanoma antigens, such as MART-1 and GP-100, to increase the recog- nition of melanoma cells by T cells and improve the immune response [ 260]. In any case, therapeutic strategies have to address the versatility and heterogeneity of melanoma cells. 3.5. Signaling via G b/GgSubunits All GPCRs activate the G \x0c/G\rsignaling pathways, but this pathway remains poorly studied. The activation of GPCRs mainly induces the activation of G \x0bsubunits, but also that of the G\x0c/G\rcomplex. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 19, 'content': 'There are ve G \x0csubunits (G\x0c1-5) in humans encoded by the GNB1-5 genes. All except GNB5 are expressed in melanoma [ 100]. There are 16 G \rsubunits encoded by the GNG1-16 genes, of which only G \r2, G\r4, G\r5, G\r6, G\r7, G\r10, G\r11, and G\r12are expressed in melanoma [ 100,110,115]. The signicance of G \x0c/G\rsignaling in melanoma has not yet been fully assessed. G \x0c/G\rsubunits activate the PI3K signaling pathway. This activation is either direct or indirect via calcium release [ 261264]. Classically, PI3K activation induces AKT activation and increases cell survival [ 265]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 20 of 39 were shown to inhibit melanoma migration in vitro through EPAC inhibition [ 261]. Given the known importance of the PI3K/AKT pathways, as well as the role of migration in melanoma, its regulation by G \x0c/G\rsubunits needs to be further analyzed. 3.6.b-Arrestin Signaling All GPCRs activate \x0c-arrestin biased signaling, but this remains poorly studied in melanoma. At the end of the 1990s, it was observed that Src family tyrosine kinases are recruited by \x0c-arrestins (encoded by ARRB1-2 genes) to the adrenergic receptor 2a, a member of the GPCR family [ 266]. Surprisingly, the binding of protein kinases induced activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway only if the receptor was internalized [ 266,267]. Other observations in the mid-2000s showed that such signaling was non-canonical and in- dependent of G-proteins. Indeed, the activation of GPCRs activates three types of proteins: G-proteins, GPCR protein kinases (GRKs), and arrestins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 20, 'content': 'GRKs and arrestins are the most important elements involved in the termination of GPCR activation. GRKs phosphorylate the receptor on its C-terminal residues, which prevents the activation of G-proteins [ 268]. Such phosphorylation recruits the non-visual arrestins, \x0c-arrestin 1 & 2, which in turn recruit clathrin, resulting in receptor internalization by clathrin coated-pits [ 268270]. De- pending on the afnity of the GPCR/ \x0c-arrestin complex, receptors can be recycled or degraded in the proteasome [ 271]. In early endosomes, the GPCR/ \x0c-arrestin complex is able to form a signalosome by recruiting signaling proteins, such as members of the MAPK pathway [ 270,272,273]. As a result, several pathways can be activated, such as the MAPK/ERK and Src pathways [ 266,274], AKT [ 275], MAPK/JNK [ 276], MAPK/p38 [ 277], or PDEs [278]. GRK-arrestin signaling has been poorly studied in melanoma. \x0c-arrestin2 is able to bias MC1R signaling by promoting activation of the MAPK pathway towards that of cAMP-dependent signaling [ 279]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 20, 'content': 'A transcript of the MC1R (MC1R-203) naturally promotes such biased signaling toward the MAPK pathway [ 280]. Mutants of metabolic glutamate receptors (mGluR3G848E) can promote such biased signaling, characterized by prolonged internalization of the receptor [ 281]. This mutation is found in rare cases of cutaneous melanoma (<1%) [ 110]. Conversely, in uveal melanoma, the CYSLTR2L129Qmutation forces signaling via G \x0bq/11 and disfavors \x0c-arrestin-biased signaling [ 282]. GPCR signaling is certainly much more complex than what is presented here: their interactions with GRKs and arrestins and the dynamics of their desensitization add another level of complexity that needs to be investigated in the future. 4. Perspectives of Targeting GPCRs in Melanoma The molecular and cellular consequences of the activation of GPCRs in melanoma clearly indicate that GPCRs could be interesting targets for therapy. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Targeting GPCRs has the advantage of seeking readily available membrane molecules instead of signaling proteins with molecules that need to cross the plasma membrane without deteriorating the intracellular environment and/or endocytotic vesicles and lysosomes [283285]. 4.1. Limitation of Available Tools Large-scale sequencing conducted by the cancer genome atlas consortium (TCGA) has shown that approximately 92% of the melanoma patients tested had at least one nonsense or missense mutation of at least one non-olfactory GPCR [ 110,286]. Each melanoma patient has an average of 10 mutated GPCRs [ 110,286]. The functions of the vast majority of the receptors and associated mutations remain uncharacterized. The most frequent GPCR recurrent mutation in melanoma is GPR139R217C, but this mutation does not exceed 1% of the patients and may have a driver function. A large number of mutations have been found in various GPCRs, but can be considered as passengers since none of these mutations are recurrent in melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Indeed, the Adhesion G Protein-Coupled Receptor V1 ( ADGRV1 ) is mutated in approximately 30% of patients, but only a few recurrent mutations are found. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 21 of 39 cDNA (19,557 nucleotides) [110,286]. These data suggest that if we cannot offer patients a personalized and targeted therapy (one patient = one mutation = one drug), patients could be grouped by activated signaling for therapy that is still targeted but less personalized. This less direct choice of therapy would consider the positioning of the GPCR within the signaling pathways and target the downstream node(s) [ 287]. Such a therapeutic option would also be attractive in the setting of patients who do not have mutated GPCRs but rather mutations in downstream signaling elements. Receptor activation may result by a mechanism independent of the presence of a mutations in the gene. This could be related to overexpression or de novo expression of a receptor, which would induce a higher basal level of receptor activity, or activation of the receptor by the production of its ligand in the environment [ 288290]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Binding of the ligand to the receptor may occur in the primary melanoma in an autocrine/paracrine mode, with ligand production by the melanoma cell or by cells in the microenvironment [ 291]. For example, activation of EDNRB by ET-1 secreted by surrounding melanoma cells induces reactivation of the MAPK pathway after BRAFi treatment [ 292]. In this model, ET is secreted by melanoma cells and activates EDNRB in an autocrine and/or paracrine manner [ 292]. Alternatively, ligand production may only occur at the metastatic site and thus only affect metastasis formation and not melanoma initiation [ 293,294]. Ligand production may attract tumor cells into the target tissue by chemoattraction, promote cell survival and/or proliferation, or induce resistance to drugs. In this perspective, ET-1 is highly expressed in the lungs and can promote the colonization of melanoma cells that express ENDRB in this organ. The reactivation of MAPK pathways by expression of EDNRB may occur at primary sites, as well as in distant organs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Ligand-dependent tissue expression can be observed, in particular, in the lungs, where only 50 highly expressed ligands are found [ 114,295298]. An important limitation is our lack of knowledge about the level of gene expression in melanoma cells that colonize distant organs. Transcriptomic analyses would be extremely useful in determining which GPCRs are expressed in melanoma in distant metastases. The correlation of GPCR expression data in melanoma at sites of metastasis with expression in the target tissue of ligands for these GPCRs would allow the selection of potential receptors of interest. An alternative to transcriptional analysis would be the identication of GPCRs at metastatic sites on the basis of protein expression. However, the identication of GPCRs by immunolabeling is difcult, due to the small exposed area of extracellular epitopes and very high conformational variability. Conventional mass spectrometry is also challenging, as receptors are not readily isolatable from membranes [299301]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 21, 'content': 'The improvement of antibody-isolation technologies associated with our knowledge of GPCRs will lead to the generation of new, more selective antibodies. The development of nanobodies appears to be promising for the detection and targeting of GPCRs [ 302]. The major limitation in the high-throughput identication of GPCRs via mass spectrometry is the depletion of GPCRs from mass spectrometry samples. This bias can be avoided by performing surfaceomes, which will signicantly enrich samples for membrane glycopro- teins and thus potentially reveal the expression of GPCRs [ 301,303,304]. Finally, GPCRs can also be indirectly identied by analyzing cell-binding ligands rather than the receptors directly [305]. Data mining of the literature generates databases, such as TCGA. To date, current databases have been extremely useful for the identication of driver mutations and prognos- tic biomarkers in melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 21, 'content': 'However, they are composed of 80% primary tumors or skin or lymphatic metastases [ 110,286], whereas visceral, bone, and nervous system melanoma metastases are poorly represented. The presence of characteristic and highly aggressive mutations in distant metastasis may be hidden by the small sample size. Furthermore, current databases were generated before the generalization of current treatments and the samples constituting the large databases came from patients who were naive to any treat- ment with MAPK or checkpoint inhibitors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 22 of 39 subclones in which GPCR signaling is activated. The generation of databases enriched with samples from distant metastases and patients treated with MAPK and immune checkpoint inhibitors would be of great interest to the scientic community. Large-scale high-throughput screening using RNA interference or CRISPR-Cas9 could be performed to identify the GPCR-dependence of melanoma cells for growth or invasion. Such screens can also be performed in vivo . To evaluate the role of specic GPCRs, trans- plantation of genetically modied cells into animals would reveal their roles in internal organ colonization and in melanoma progression [ 306]. Such screening could also be performed by generating transgenic animal models, but the experiments would become extremely complex, time consuming and expensive. Zebrash may be a suitable model for these types of studies. Indeed, it is relatively easy to generate and maintain large groups of transgenic animals [ 307310]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Furthermore, zebrash express many of the GPCRs expressed in humans, as well as their signaling machinery [ 311,312]. In addition, there are already many melanoma models that could be used to test genetic modications in melanoma-producing animals, for example, to assess the pro-metastatic effect [ 313,314]. Particular attention should be paid to studies based on in vivo cell-injections. Indeed, the type of injection will determine the preferential location of metastasis formation. For example, in mice, tail-vein injections are more likely to result in lung metastasis formation, whereas intrasplenic injections are more likely to result in liver metastases [ 315]. Thus, the use of a particular type of injection may mask the action of a GPCR on metastasis formation in a tissue not targeted by the injection method. The study of the tissue expression prole of GPCR ligands and the use of an appropriate method can address this concern. 4.2. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Novel Structures and Drug Design Approaches To efciently target GPCRs, two parallel and complementary approaches are used: binding of compounds (including small molecules, antibodies and radiotherapies) to GRPRs, and structure determination of GRPRs. The structure of GPCR can be elucidated using X-ray crystallography, Cryo-EM, NMR and articial intelligence. A better knowledge of GPCR structure and molecular ligand-receptor interactions is critical for structure-based molecule design and the design of new receptor-activating agonist or antagonist molecules [ 316]. Such structural knowledge needs to be as accurate as possible and is currently acquired by two main experimental methods and one predictive method [316,317]. The rst three-dimensional structure of a GPCR, rhodopsin, was solved by X-ray crystallization in 2000 [ 318]. This method requires obtaining stable crystals of the receptor extracted from its membrane in solution, which has been a major obstacle to structure determination [ 319]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 22, 'content': 'This problem has been solved by modifying GPCRs to make them more stable while retaining their activity [ 319322]. This can be achieved, for example, by fusing the T4 lysozyme protein as a replacement for intracellular loop 3 [ 321] or by mutating the receptor to thermostabilize it [ 320]. A new technique for crystal structure resolution has recently been developed: X-ray-free electron laser (XFEL) crystallography. The use of lasers reduces the size of the crystals required and, therefore, increases their stability [323,324]. Crystallization has been completed by cryo-electronmicroscopy (Cryo-EM). Signif- icant improvements in detectors and structure determination algorithms have enabled the resolution of structures at the particle scale [ 325327]. Cryo-EM does not require the formation of crystals, as the receptors are directly vitried after purication, but requires more computational time to solve the structure, resulting in lower resolution [ 317,328330]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 22, 'content': 'These various constraints and the relative novelty of these techniques mean that, currently, the structure of only 20% of non-olfactory GPCRs has been solved [ 328]. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) allows the acquisition of dynamic data and thus complements the data from the xed structures of crystallography and Cryo-EM [331]. More recently, advances in articial intelligence have made it possible to approach structures using machine learning. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 23 of 39 by the publication of the algorithms AlphaFold2 andRoseTTAfold , which generated highly accurate three-dimensional structures of any protein of interest [ 332334]. These algorithms are completed by GPCR-specic algorithms, such as the already developed arsenal, which is specic to the GPCR eld [ 335338]. Nonetheless, although these algorithms all regularly perform well, they can still be improved. GPCRs differ, particularly in their loops, which results in a decit for machine-learning algorithms and thus low condence in the models, often producing false predictions [ 335,339]. Generating and publishing more receptor structures will increase both direct knowledge about receptors and knowledge about other receptors via increased substrates for algorithms and in silico prediction. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Predictions of molecular anchors in receptors can also be made by site-directed mutagenesis (SDM) studies to nd amino acids that interact with known ligands of the receptor [ 340,341]. Crystallization and SDM techniques can be used synergistically to better understand the binding of the molecule to the receptor and produce much more rened and/or efcient molecules [340342]. For the development of an effective therapy, stable, receptor-specic agonists or an- tagonists must be found. The screening of drug libraries is performed to nd molecular scaffolds capable of binding to receptors and modulating their activity [ 343]. Screening can be performed using afnity assays by assessing the ability of molecules to bind to the target as puried proteins, on whole cells expressing the target, or on isolated mem- branes [344346] . Puried proteins are free of binding to secondary targets, but the ability of the molecules to cross a membrane is not analyzed. Moreover, the presence of the membrane is often necessary for receptor stability [345]. Afnity tests are based on the ability of molecules to displaceand replace on the receptora reference ligand known to bind the receptor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Detection is either by radio- labeling of the reference ligand, regularly labeled with iodine-125 or tritium [ 347349] or by uorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), in which both the reference ligand and the receptor are bound to a uorophore that allows resonance from one molecule to the other [ 350,351]. Such screening is only able to identify ligands that bind to the same site as the competitor. To overcome this bias, the analysis of the activity of various elements of GPCR signaling, such as IP1 concentration for the G \x0bqpathway or cAMP for the G \x0bs pathway, can be jointly performed on a large scale [ 352,353]. The activity of molecules on downstream G-protein signaling pathways can also be assessed using kinase assays from protein extracts or puried protein or by FRET [ 354356]. These screens can be virtually performed with high efciency if the receptor structure is known [ 357359]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 23, 'content': 'The hits that are found are generally of low afnity for their targets and require optimization to be usable [ 343]. They will then need to undergo pharmaco-modulation that will be directed through structural data and docking algorithms to result in lead generation [360362] . These leads will have to be tested in vivo to verify their pharmacokinetic parameters (absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination) at the risk of obtaining only molecules incapable of producing an effect in vivo and condemned to be used only as an in vitro tool [ 363,364]. Molecules identied as leads can be used to verify the efcacy of these molecules on the cellular and molecular processes of melanoma progression, as well as on the formation of metastases and resistance to treatment. In addition to small chemical molecules, GPCRs can be targeted by monoclonal anti- bodies. Several have been generated and approved as therapeutic targets, such as moga- mulizumab, a humanized antibody against chemokine receptor type 4. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 23, 'content': 'The advantage of using monoclonal antibodies in treating diseases is notable because they have a long half-life . Finally, targeted radiotherapy is currently being developed and constitutes a promising strategy to target GPCRs in cancer. The radioactivity is delivered to a specic tumor by means of a systemic injection. For melanoma treatment, targeted treatment can be achieved by labeling small molecules, such as melanin ligands, peptides that recognize a specic receptor (MC1R), or antibodies (anti-melanin, anti-GD3) [ 365,366]. The efcacy of targeted radiotherapy depends on the dose delivered, which in turn depends on the radionuclide used and the time that the labeled compound remains associated with the target. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Cancers 2022 ,14, 706 24 of 39 radiotherapy is highly relevant for the treatment of disseminated lesions and overcoming tumor heterogeneity through cross-re irradiation with \x0c-radionuclides characterized by a decay spectrum of between a few nanometers and 2 mm. The reception of adequate doses of radiation from neighboring receptor-expressing cells can kill tumor cells lacking the targeted receptor in the tumor. This property is particularly important for melanoma, in which gene expression is often heterogeneous. Targeted radiotherapy of the somatostatin receptor is used for the clinical treatment of neuroendocrine tumors. The same strategy could be adapted for targeting GPCRs in melanoma. 5. Conclusions Of the eight GPCRs shown to be involved in pigmentation, only three have been studied in the context of melanoma (EDNRB, MC1R, and GRM1). The remaining ve receptors (DRD2, FZD4, GPR143, GPR161, and SMO) may be of interest in the context of melanoma, but they have not been studied yet. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Conversely, it would be relevant to evaluate the importance of the eight receptors described only in a melanoma context (FZD7, GPER1, GRM3, GRM5, PAR1/F2R, CXCR4, CCR7, and CCR10), for their implication in the melanocyte lineage as a whole, whether during embryonic development, melanocyte home- ostasis/renewal and/or melanogenesis. The identication of completely novel GPCRs, important in melanomagenesis, will require detailed studies of primary and/or metastatic tumors through the development of new and more powerful analysis tools as their detection may escape current RNAseq and proteomic techniques. The low number of GPCR mutations and their modication of expression/activity often dependent on temporal, tissue and molecular contexts render their studies in vivo es- sential to precisely dene their roles. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 24, 'content': 'The creation of novel Omics databases generated from distant melanoma metastases treated with immune checkpoint or/and MAPK inhibitors would reveal novel GPCR players involved in resistance and metastasis. Once such GPCR target(s) would be identied and characterized, small molecules will have to be developed to directly target it/them. These molecules can be screened from chemical libraries or designed according to their structure, based on their crystal or articial intelligence using Alphafold for instance. Prior to 2010, surgery remained the primary treatment option for resectable melanoma, with eventual chemotherapies, although these treatments did not provide a survival benet for patients when metastasis arose. Over the past decade, effective therapeutic approaches such as immunotherapies and targeted therapies, alone or in combination, have signicantly changed the prognosis of patients with advanced melanoma. However, despite the success of these treatments, their long-term efcacy remains limited by mechanisms of acquired resistance. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 24, 'content': 'In this review, we have highlighted the involvement of GRPRs in the initiation and progression of melanoma and mentioned their therapeutic evaluation in preclinical or clinical trials. Most of these studies are in the early stages of clinical development, being studied in phase I or phase I/II. The success of these trials will depend on understanding the activity of GPCRs and the quality/stability of the drug used in clinical development. GPCRs signal through one or more G-proteins and thus can regulate multiple signaling pathways simultaneously. Therefore, targeting GPCR activities and downstream signaling nodes may simultaneously inhibit several key signaling pathways in melanomagenesis. This strategy should be more effective (multi-pathway inhibition) in a greater proportion of patients (BRAF or NRAS mutated) than existing targeted therapies, and should minimize the development of cancer cell resistance. A better understanding of the specic function of GPCRs in melanoma will certainly lead to innovative therapy in the future and will open new avenues for the treatment of melanoma. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs and Their Signaling as a Therapeutic Option in Melanoma', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.H.R., Z.A., L.L., V .D.; writingoriginal draft prepara- tion, J.H.R., Z.A., L.L., V .D.; writingreview and editing, J.H.R., Z.A., L.L., V .D.; funding acquisition, V .D., L.L. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'TYPEMini Review PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/six.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum DOI/one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum OPENACCESS EDITEDBY Phung N. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Thai, University of California, Davis, United States REVIEWEDBY Di Lang, University of California, San Francisco, United States Avais Daulat, Institut Paoli-Calmettes (IPC), France *CORRESPONDENCE Hao Zhang zhanghao@stanford.edu SPECIALTYSECTION This article was submitted to General Cardiovascular Medicine, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine RECEIVED /zero.tnum/three.tnum August /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum ACCEPTED /two.tnum/zero.tnum September /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum PUBLISHED /zero.tnum/six.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum CITATION Zhang H, Ren L and Shivnaraine RV (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum) Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac brosis. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. /nine.tnum:/one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum. doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum COPYRIGHT /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum Zhang, Ren and Shivnaraine. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac brosis Hao Zhang/one.tnum*, Lu Ren/one.tnumand Rabindra Vishwadev Shivnaraine/two.tnum /one.tnumDepartment of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine , Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States,/two.tnumDepartment of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States Cardiac brosis occurs ubiquitously in ischemic heart failure, g enetic cardiomyopathies,diabetesmellitus,andaging.Ittriggers myocardialstiness, which impairs cardiac function, ultimately progressing to end- stage heart failure and increased mortality. Although several targets for anti-brotic therapies have been identied, including TGF- and receptor tyrosine kinase, there is currently no FDA-approved drug specically targ eting cardiac brosis. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are integ ral, multipass membrane-bound receptors that exhibit diverse and cell-speci c expression, oering novel and unrealized therapeutic targets for cardiac b rosis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'This review highlights the emerging roles of several GPCRs and brie y explores theirdownstreampathwaysthatarecrucialincardiacbrosis.Wewil lnotonly provide an overview of the GPCRs expressed on cardiac broblasts that are directly involved in myobroblast activation but also describe those GPCRs which contribute to cardiac brosis via indirect crosstalk mechanis ms. We also discuss the challenges of identifying novel eective ther apies for cardiac brosis and oer strategies to circumvent these challenges. KEYWORDS cardiacbrosis,GPCR,antibrotictherapy,broblast,Gprotein, crosstalk Pathophysiology of cardiac brosis Cardiovascular diseases (CVD), which aect the heart or vasculature, rema in the leading cause of mortality, responsible for 31% of all deaths worldwide ( 1). Fibrotic diseases lead to nearly 1 million deaths annually, most of which are due to lung and cardiac brosis ( 2). Dierent types and consequences of cardiac brosis exist, and their pathology depends on the underlying cause. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 1, 'content': 'For example, aging, hypertension, and diabetes induce myocardial interstitial brosis and decrease ventricular compliance , leading to the pathogenesis of heart failure with diastolic dysfunction ( 3,4). However, brosis is not invariably detrimental. In myocardial infarction (MI), the loss of a substantial number of cardiomyocytes triggers myobroblasts activatio n, representing reparative brosis and contributing to scar formation ( 5). Although the scar lacks contractile ability, it serves an important protective role in keeping cardiac st ructural integrity and preventing catastrophic mechanical complications, such as cardiac rupture(6). Cardiacbroblastisanabundantcelltypeintheheart( 7).Inbrosisdiseases,cardiac broblasts are activated to myobroblasts (MyoFB), which become highly pr oliferative and specialized in the generation of extracellular matrix proteins and contractile genes, such as ACTA2, encoding for smooth muscle -actin (8,9). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum brosis is identied as the enlargement of the cardiac interstitium resulting from the deposition of extracellular proteins such as collagen, bronectin, and elastin ( 3). This accumulation accompanies most cardiac pathologic conditions, such as myocardial stiness and diastolic dysfunction, and the extentofcardiacbrosisisapredictorofadverseoutcomes( 3). Although there is no FDA-approved drug specically targeting cardiac myobroblast activation, pirfenidone and nintedanib have been approved to treat idiopathic lung brosis (10).Inaddition,pirfenidonehasbeentestedinPhaseIIclinical trial PIROUETTE among patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and myocardial brosis (11). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The results show that the administration of pirfenidone for52weeksreducedmyocardialbrosis( 12),indicatingbrosis sharessimilarpathways,andantibrotictherapycanbeutilized universallyamongdierentorgans. GPCRs signaling in heart tissue G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), located at the cell membrane, possess diverse expression proles throughout the bodyandareknowntoexhibittissueandcell-specicmembrane expressions ( 13). The basic function of GPCRs is to transduce extracellular stimulus into intracellular signals ( 14). The G- proteinsthatcoupledtoGPCRsarecomposedofaheterotrimer of,, and subunitsG , G, and G , respectively that is kept in an inactive basal state where are tightly bound and activated when dissociates from (14). Since GPCRs consist of more than 800 receptors and account for the most diverse family of proteins in the human genome, the combination of GPCRs at a particular cell type may be substantially heterogeneous and diverse ( 15). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'In this review, we willfocusontherolesofGPCRandthedownstreamsignalingin cardiacbrosisregulationandillustratetheirutilityaspromising targetsforcardiacbrosis( Table1). GPCR signaling may also signicantly vary within the cell. To date, 21 G , 6 G , and 12 G have been discovered (14). Heterotrimeric G proteins are generally identied by their G subunits and classied into four major groups: G  stimulatory (G s), Ginhibitory (G i), Gq, and G 12/13 (14). Dierent G-protein subfamilies execute distinct signaling cascades. G s stimulates adenylyl cyclase to increase the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which results in protein kinase A (PKA) activation and subsequent phosphorylation of intracellular proteins ( 32). Conversely, G i exhibits a suppressive eect on adenylyl cyclase, decreasing intracellular cAMP ( 32). Gq activates phospholipase C (PLC), resulting in phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate (PIP 2) cleavage and producing the second messengers inositol 1,4,5triphosphate (IP 3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP 3triggers Ca2+release from the endoplasmic reticulum, along with DAG to activate protein kinase C (PKC) (33). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'G12/13 can activate the small GTPase Rho, whichserves as a regulator of a number of intracellular processes, includingactinstressbersformationandcellgrowthcontroller (34). GPCRs exist widely and heterogeneously in a cell- specic distribution among the three major cell types found within the heart (i.e., cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, cardiac broblasts)( 35,36). Besides the G protein signaling cascades, -arrestins have the capacity to regulate GPCR activity independently (37). Previously, -arrestins were discovered to mediate receptor internalization and desensitization, exemplied by the role of -arrestin in 1 adrenergic receptors ( 1AR) desensitization in cardiomyocytes ( 38). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Later, other functions of-arrestins were identied as signal transducers to regulate a variety of intracellular signaling pathways ( 39), including transforming growth factor- (TGF- ), as well as downstream kinases such as mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) ( 40), which are highly involvedintheregulationofbrosis. The GPCR expression level depends on a steady-state transport of receptors between the cell membrane and endosomes ( 41). Agonists of GPCRs induce internalization that alters the membrane expression level in the short term. Prolonged over-stimulation leads to a downregulation of these receptors at the transcriptional level ( 41). For example, 1AR and2AR are the predominant GPCR subtypes expressed in cardiomyocytes and the primary regulators of cardiovascular function ( 42). Epinephrine stimulates 2AR and initially activates Gs, which increases the beating rate. However, after 1015minofstimulation, 2ARsignalspredominantlythrough Gi, which decreases the contraction rate ( 43). Therefore, pathophysiological states may alter not only the expression of these receptors, but also the coupling specicity between the receptorsandGproteins( 41). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The diverse and cell-specic membrane expression of GPCRs, combined with their important roles in pathophysiology, make them frequent therapeutic targets, leading to 35% of all FDA-approved drugs ( 13). A variety of GPCRs have been implicated in the pathogenesis of brosis (44,45). Although several earlier drug discovery campaigns have targeted GPCRs to treat brosis, eective treatment is still lacking(44).Asbroblastsamongdierentorganssharesimilar features ( 46), we will discuss the common and distinct features ofthoseGPCRsinvolvedincardiacbrosiscomparedtobrosis inotherorgans. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum TABLE/one.tnum RepresentativeGPCRsanddownstreampathwaysinvolvedi nbrosisregulation. Receptor familyTarget Transduction mechanismDrug Preclinicalandclinicalstudies Part1:GPCRsexpressedonbroblasts Protease-activated receptorPAR1 G i/o,Gq/11,and G12/13PAR1antagonist: SCH79797Inhibitcardiacbrosisinrenin-overexpressing hypertensivemicemodel( 16). Protease-activated receptorPAR2 G i/o,Gq/11,and G12/13PAR2antagonist: PZ-235Inhibitliverbrosisinnon-alcoholicfattyliver diseasemicemodel( 17); Incontrast,PAR2knockoutincreasescardiac brosisduetocompensatoryaugmented PAR1(18). Lysophospholipid receptorLPA1 G i/o,Gq/11,and G12/13LPA1antagonist: BMS-986020Inhibitcardiacbrosisinahypertrophic cardiomyopathymousemodel( 19); EectiveinPhaseIIclinicaltrialforidiopathic pulmonarybrosis(NCT01766817)( 20). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Lysophospholipid receptorS1PR1 G q/11,and G12/13/ Overexpressioninducescardiacbrosis( 21). Adenosinereceptor A2B G sandG q A2Bantagonist: GS6201Inhibitcardiacbrosisinmyocardialinfarction micemodel( 22). Adenosinereceptor A1 G i A1antagonist: SLV320Reducemyocardialbrosisinratswith nephrectomy( 23). Adenosinereceptor A2A G s A2Aagonist: CGS21680ReducecardiacbrosisinDOCA-salttreatedmice (24). Prostaglandin receptorEP4 G s EP4agonist: ONO-0260164Inhibitcardiacbrosisinpressure overload-inducedmicemodel( 25). Part2:GPCRsexpressedoncardiomyocytesandendothelialcells adrenergic receptor1AR G s blocker Inhibitmaladaptiveremodelingandcardiac brosisviacardiomyocyte-broblastcrosstalk (26). Angiotensin receptorAT1R G q/11 AT1Rinhibitors andantagonist: ACEI/ARBInhibitadversecardiacremodelingandbrosisin heartfailurepatients viadirecteectson broblastsandindirecteects viacrosstalk( 27). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Endothelial receptorETA Gq / ET-1knockoutexertedantibroticeectsinthe diabetesmicemodelbyinhibiting endothelial-to-mesenchymaltransition( 28). Part3:TargetedGproteinanddownstreampathways - - G  Ginhibitor: GalleinInhibitcardiacbrosisinmyocardialinfarction micemodel( 29). - - cAMP adenylylcyclase activator:forskolinElevatecAMPinhibitsmyobroblastactivationin cardiacbroblasts( 30). - - YAP/TAZ YAPinhibitor: vertepornInhibitcardiacbrosisinmyocardialinfarction micemodel( 31). as a tethered ligand ( 47) (Figure1). Activation of protease- activated receptor-1 (PAR1), which couples to Gq/11, Gi/o, and G12/13, elevates the level of probrotic gene expression in rat cardiac broblasts, leading to myobroblast activation and increasing collagen synthesis by 60% ( 48). Conversely, inhibiting PAR1 with SCH79797 attenuates cardiac brosis and hypertrophy in the renin-overexpressing induced hypertensivemicemodel( 16).However,PAR1ishighlyexpressedinplatelets, and its antagonist is used for antiplatelet therapy ( 49). The o-targeteectrestrictstheapplicationofthistargetforbrosis treatment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR2), which also couplestoGq/11,Gi/o,andG12/13,isexpressedonliverstellate cells that regulate the response to liver cirrhosis ( 17). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum FIGURE/one.tnum GPCRs in brosis regulation. Some GPCRs mediate probrotic signal s, including protease-activated receptors (PAR/one.tnum), lysophosph olipid receptors (LPA/one.tnum, S/one.tnumP), and adenosine receptors (AR), that acti vate receptors coupled to G i/o, G q//one.tnum/one.tnum, G /one.tnum/two.tnum//one.tnum/three.tnum. G activation is also proved to be probrotic. In contrast, prostaglandin receptor (PGE/two.tnum), whic h activates receptors G s and direct cAMP activator exert antibrotic eects. collagen deposition up to 50100% ( 17). In contrast, 1-year-old PAR2-knockout mice suered from diastolic dysfunction, associated with an increased -SMA, collagen deposition, lysyl oxidase activity, and collagen cross-linking. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The absence of PAR2 contributed to an augmented probrotic PAR1 and dependent signaling in heart ( 18), indicating that the same GPCR may exert a distinct role in brosis regulation among dierentorgans. Lysophospholipid receptors The lysophospholipid receptor group is a member of the GPCR family of integral membrane proteins essential for lipid signaling ( 50). Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and its G protein- coupled receptor (LPA1) contribute to brosis progression (51). LPA1 is highly expressed on human primary broblasts, which predominantly couples to G q/11, G i/o, and G 12/13 proteins ( 52). Myocardial brosis is a key pathologic feature of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). In the HCM mouse model, LPA1 ablation developed signicantly less hypertrophy and brosis ( 19). Since LPA1 antagonist BMS-986020 has been tested in Phase II clinical trial for idiopathic pulmonary brosis (20), it could potentially be used to treat cardiac brosis in the future. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Sphingosine 1 phosphate receptor-1 (S1PR1), whichalsobelongstothelysophospholipidreceptorfamily,couplesto Gq/11, G i/o, and G 12/13. Its overexpression was capable to inducescardiachypertrophyandbrosisthroughangiotensinII andinterleukin-6inS1PR1-transgenicmouseheart( 21). Adenosine receptors In addition to adenosine and its receptors crucial role in wound healing ( 53), they have also been found to promote brosis by producing excess matrix in the heart, skin, lungs, and liver ( 54). The adenosine receptor (AR) family comprises four GPCRs: A1, A2A, A2B, and A3 ( 55). Previous studies have suggested AR antagonists as an eective brosis treatment. For example,caeine,anon-selectiveadenosinereceptorantagonist, has been shown to alleviate liver brosis in animal models and to reduce liver brosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C (56,57). However, the weak anity of caeine to ARs requiresmicromolarconcentrationinplasma,whichpreventsits potentialfordrugdevelopment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 4, 'content': 'A pro-brotic role for the A2B, which couples to G s and Gq, has been supported by a study using A2B knockout mice, which exhibited improved diastolic dysfunction and attenuated interstitial brosis 8 weeks after MI ( 22). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum and dysfunction compared to vehicle in the mouse MI model (58). Similarly, in the rat model of myocardial ischemia- reperfusion, GS-6201 improved ejection fraction and decreased brosisinthenon-infarctandborderzones( 59).Inaddition,the adenosine A1 receptor (i.e., a G i coupled receptor) antagonist SLV320 reduces myocardial brosis in rats with nephrectomy (23). In contrast, the activation of A2A (i.e., a G s coupled receptor) by CGS21680 reduced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, cardiac inammation, and brosis in deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA) treated mice ( 24). These interesting ndings suggesttheeectsofARsonmyocardialadaptationaresubtype- specic. The distinct role of AR subtypes in cardiac brosis regulationneedsfurtherinvestigation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Prostaglandin receptor Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptor, which couples to G s, actsviacAMP and is abundantly expressed in broblasts ( 60). Prostaglandin E2 receptor 4 (EP4) stimulation was reported to be cardioprotective. Its agonist ONO-0260164 signicantly prevented systolic dysfunction and the progression of myocardial brosis in the mouse model of cardiac hypertrophy induced by transverse aortic constriction ( 25). Conversely, EP4 knockout mice exhibited concentric hypertrophy and myocardialbrosisinmicefedwithhigh-fatdiet( 61). GPCRs involved in cardiac brosis viacrosstalk Of particular relevance to cardiac brosis compared to brosisinotherorgansarethedistinctfeaturesofthehearttissue environment ( 4).In the heart, the crosstalkbetween broblasts, cardiomyocytes,andendothelialcellsplaysanimportantrolein brosis regulation ( 62). Dierent types of intercellular crosstalk exist, including direct contact communication viagap junction ornanotubes,indirectcellinteraction viaparacrinefactors,and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interaction ( 63). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'In particular, several GPCRs and downstream pathways have been involved in cardiac brosis regulation viathe crosstalk mechanism (Figure2). adrenergic receptor The stimulation of 1AR on cardiomyocytes increases contractilitythroughPKA-mediatedphosphorylationofspecic regulatory proteins to increase intracellular Ca2+level or sensitivity, such as L-type Ca2+channels, phospholamban, ryanodine receptor, and troponin I ( 64). However, long-term stimulation of 1AR leads to cardiac hypertrophy and brosis, FIGURE/two.tnum GPCRs involved in brosis viacrosstalk mechanisms. Several GPCRs contribute to cardiac brosis viainteractions among cardiomyocytes (CMs), endothelial cells (ECs), cardiac broblasts (CFs), and extracellular matrix (ECM). Inhibiti ng those and inhibiting those GPCRs or downstream pathways exert antibroticeectsintheheart. AR,adrenergicreceptor.AT/one.tnumR, angiotensin receptor type /one.tnum. ET A, endothelin receptor A. progressively developing into heart failure ( 26). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Although - blockers cannot directly prevent MyoFB activation, those drugs havebeendemonstratedtopreventcardiacbrosisandimprove survivalinmicemodelsandclinics viacardiomyocyte-broblast communications( 26). Angiotensin II receptor Angiotensinreceptors,particularlyAT1R,playanimportant role in heart pathophysiology ( 65). Cardiac AT1R, coupled to Gq,isupregulatedwithhypertrophicandischemia,promoting adverse maladaptive cardiac remodeling, including cardiac brosis in chronic heart failure ( 66). Ang II, the endogenous ligand, is a peptide hormone that regulates several critical physiological processes, representing a principal component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system ( 66). AT1R is expressed in cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, and cardiac broblasts. Its overexpression lead to cardiac brosis and hypertrophy, whereas knockout of AT1R improved cardiac function ( 67). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 5, 'content': 'The mechanisms of probrotic AT1R are multifold, including direct eects on broblasts and, more importantly, viacrosstalk between broblasts, cardiomyocytes, orendothelialcells( 62).Duetoitscentralroleincardiovascular pathophysiology, AT1R inhibitors and antagonists, ACEI and ARB, are essential drugs for heart failure treatment and have Frontiersin CardiovascularMedicine /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum been proven to protect against maladaptive remodeling and cardiacbrosis( 27). Endothelial receptor Among the endothelial receptors, ET Ais the major isoform found in the cardiovascular system ( 68). Chronic stimulation with ET Aagonist ET-1 is associated with adverse eects, including cardiac hypertrophy and brosis ( 4). High levels of ET-1 in plasma have been found in heart failure patients (68). ETA, which couples to G q, promotes IP formation and activates MAPK signaling ( 69). ET1 knockout exerted antibrotic eects in the diabetes mice model viaendothelial- broblastinteraction( 70). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Fibroblast-ECM interaction Increased ECM stiness and tension are known to activate broblasts through the yes-associated protein 1 (YAP) and transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) signaling pathway, which mediates the mechanical sensing of cardiac broblasts in brotic diseases ( 71). The Hippo- YAP-TAZ pathway is mediated by multiple G proteins, and therefore involved in common GPCR downstream pathways (72). Fibroblast conditional deletion of Yap1 attenuated injury- induced cardiac brosis either after acute MI or chronic angiotensinIIphenylephrinestimulation( 73). Gproteinanddownstreampathways Multiple probrotic GPCRs are co-expressed in broblasts, indicating the possibility of redundancy of G protein activity inmyobroblastactivationmechanisms.Theseresultschallenge the eectiveness of antibrotic therapy by antagonizing one singleGPCR.Toaddresstheredundancyissue,onestrategyisto targettheGproteinitselforconvergentdownstreampathways. Gs and cAMP GPCRs coupled to G s activate adenylyl cyclase to elevate the intracellular cAMP level ( 14). To examine the consequence of Gs signaling, forskolin is used as an activator of adenyl cyclase (AC) to increase cAMP. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Experiments using forskolin to activate AC have identied that this pathway results in the inhibition of TGF- -induced broblast activation ( 74). In rat cardiac broblasts, elevating cAMP formation by AC overexpression or by forskolin attenuates myobroblast marker geneexpressionandcollagensynthesis( 30).G G protein subunits were identied as G protein componentsalmost30yearsago( 75).Sincethen,G signaling has been demonstrated as diverse, regulating a number of downstream pathways depending on the interacting eectors. Forexample,G hasthecapacitytoactivateGprotein-coupled inward rectier K+(GIRK) channels, phospholipase A and C, plasma membrane Ca2+pump, PI3K-AKT, GPCR kinase 2 (GRK2), and guanine exchange factors (GEFs) for small G proteins( 76).Moreover,asmallmoleculeG inhibitorGallein hasbeenshowntoinhibitmyobroblastactivation invitro(77). Gallein treatment a week after ischemic/reperfusion is eective in reducing cardiac brosis and preserving ejection fraction in a mouse model of chronic heart failure ( 29). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Since GPCRs are comprised of andsubunits, dierentiating the eects of Gas (i.e., antibrotic) from that of G (i.e., brotic) is challenging and may depend on factors such as cell type of receptorexpression. Hippo-YAP pathway As previously described, Hippo-YAP is the common downstream pathway of multiple G proteins ( 72). Specially, activation of lysophospholipid receptors, such as LPA and S1P, coupled simultaneously with G i, Gas, and G 12/13, inhibit the Hippo signaling kinases 1/2 (Lats1/2) ( 72). The inhibition of Lats1/2 then stimulates the transcription coactivatorsYAPandTAZ,whicharerelatedtocellproliferation and migration ( 72). YAP and TAZ have recently been identied as promotors for myobroblast activation in cardiac brosis (31). Interestingly, a previous study indicated that the suppression of YAP/TAZ signaling by lovastatin attenuates angiotensin II-induced cardiac brosis, both in vitroandin vivo(78). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Polypharmacology Given that brosis may develop from multiple stimuli, one approach is to explore polypharmacology, which has the capacity to simultaneously target multiple receptors and signaling cascades ( 79). Polypharmacology has the potential to produce higher ecacy drugs and reduced drug resistance (80). For example, one of the FDA-approved drugs for idiopathic lung brosis, nintedanib, simultaneously targets broblast growth factor receptors, platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptors ( 81). With the advancements in GPCR structural biology and in-silicomodeling, compounds can be rationally predicted, modied, and designed to target multiple receptors (41,82). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Zhang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcvm./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/two.tnum./one.tnum/zero.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/one.tnum/seven.tnum/six.tnum Identify more specic GPCR to minimize o-target eects AnotherpotentialchallengefordevelopingGPCRregulators for antibrotic therapy is the widespread expression of these receptors among dierent cell types. Targeting the receptor may exert o-target eects. For example, PAR1 inhibition may not only attenuate myobroblast activation, but also impair platelet function due to PAR1s high expression on platelets ( 49). Similarly, AR inhibition by caeine inhibits liver brosis, but may simultaneously alter neurological states because of ARs high expression in neurons ( 83). Recent published single-cell RNA sequencing (sgRNA-seq) and single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) datasets from human hearts demonstrated distinct brotic responses in various types of cardiomyopathies ( 28,8486). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Therefore, multiple signaling pathways and crosstalk can be exploited, as they oer a rich blueprint of receptor distribution across dierent cell types and organs. By leveraging the single- cell sequencing database, we can identify GPCRs more specically expressed on broblasts at a given tissue and upregulated during brosis to reduce potential o-target eects (28,87). Conclusion GPCR targeting approaches have yet to produce FDA- approved drugs for brotic diseases. Nevertheless, targeting GPCRs oers a tantalizing and promising therapy for treating cardiac brosis, as more GPCR-targeted antibrotic therapies continue to enter clinical trials. Several challenges remain, and major questions need to be addressed before GPCR- mediated therapies for cardiac brosis are realized. The redundancy of probrotic G protein signals and widespread GPCR expressions must be comprehensively considered to determine and rene our approach for antibrotic therapy. A few solutions have been proposed to circumvent the challenges. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Targeting GPCRs to treat cardiac fibrosis', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Candidate drugs with polypharmacology or targeting common downstream signaling pathways have the potential to overcome theredundancychallenge.Ontheotherhand,morespecictargetsshouldbeidentied to minimize o-target eects by single-cell seq datasets of cardiomyopathy. The unique cardiac environment provides opportunities to target GPCRs highly specic expressed in the heart viacrosstalk between broblasts, cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, and ECM. Furthermore, the human induced pluripotent stem cell platform can be utilized as a high throughput and more complex human cellular model platform to complement animal models for drug development ( 88,89). Collectively, these advances in our knowledge of GPCRs in cardiac brosis provide a unique perspective on the challenges andopportunitiesinexploringGPCRstotreatcardiacbrosis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Review Article Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography Javier Garca-Nafra1and Christopher G. Tate2 1Institute for Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI) and Laboratorio de Microscopas Avanzadas (LMA), University of Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain;2MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, U.K. Correspondence: Javier Garca-Nafra ( jgarcianafria@unizar.es) or Christopher G. Tate (cgt@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk) G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest single family of cell surface recep- tors encoded by the human genome and they play pivotal roles in co-ordinating cellular systems throughout the human body, making them ideal drug targets. Structural biology has played a key role in de ning how receptors are activated and signal through G pro- teins and -arrestins. The application of structure-based drug design (SBDD) is now yield- ing novel compounds targeting GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 1, 'content': 'There is thus signi cant interest from both academia and the pharmaceutical industry in the structural biology of GPCRs as currentlyonly about one quarter of human non-odorant receptors have had their structure deter- mined. Initially, all the structures were determined by X-ray crystallography, but recent advances in electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) now make GPCRs tractable targets forsingle-particle cryo-EM with comparable resolution to X-ray crystallography. So far this year, 78% of the 99 GPCR structures deposited in the PDB ( Jan Jul 2021) were deter- mined by cryo-EM. Cryo-EM has also opened up new possibilities in GPCR structuralbiology, such as determining structures of GPCRs embedded in a lipid nanodisc and multiple GPCR conformations from a single preparation. However, X-ray crystallography still has a number of advantages, particularly in the speed of determining many structuresof the same receptor bound to different ligands, an essential prerequisite for effective SBDD. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 1, 'content': 'We will discuss the relative merits of cryo-EM and X-ray crystallography for the structure determination of GPCRs and the future potential of both techniques. Introduction G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest family of membrane proteins in humans withwidespread distribution throughout the body [ 1,2], and are highly druggable with 34% of small mol- ecule FDA-approved drugs targeting them [ 3]. GPCRs detect extracellular stimuli, such as hormones and neurotransmitters (agonists), and transduce this information into the cell through conformational changes, forming an active state of the GPCR that couples to heterotrimeric G proteins (consisting ofan,and subunits) and -arrestins ( Figure 1B,C )[4,5]. Within heterotrimeric G proteins, the -subunit is the main contributor to the speci city of coupling [ 6]. There are 16 genes in humans that encode -subunits and they are classi ed into four families depending on their function and sig- nalling cascade that they activate (G s,G i/o,G q/11and G 12/13)[7]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Given the high physiological and therapeutic value of GPCRs, considerable effort continues to be devoted to understanding their molecular pharmacology. Structures de ne how agonists (receptor activators) and antagonists (recep- tor inhibitors) bind to the receptor within the orthosteric binding pocket [ 2] and how agonist binding alters the receptor conformation from an inactive state (stabilised by antagonists) to an active state that allows G protein coupling ( Figure 1A )[8]. Structures have also identi ed the speci city determi- nants for G protein [ 6] and -arrestin coupling [ 912] and how coupling increases the af nity of ligands in the orthosteric binding pocket [ 13]. Understanding how the structure of the receptorVersion of Record published: 28 September 2021Received: 2 August 2021 Revised: 1 September 2021 Accepted: 3 September 2021  2021 The Author(s). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 1, 'content': 'This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 2, 'content': 'changes during activation has also led to molecular insights into how some ligands bind in areas distant from the orthosteric binding site and either inhibit or facilitate receptor activation (negative and positive allosteric modulators, respectively) [ 14]. Structural biology provides crucial molecular details on all aspects of receptor biology. However, GPCRs are often unstable in the detergents required for their puri cation and crystallisation [ 15], which has made struc- tural elucidation a challenge for decades. Until 2017, X-ray crystallography was the method of choice to obtainhigh-resolution structural information of GPCRs, and the structures of a variety of GPCRs were determined, mostly in an inactive state or intermediate state. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The advent of high-resolution structure determination by elec- tron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) [ 16] has triggered an explosion of membrane protein structures and, since 2019, the number of membrane protein structures determined by cryo-EM is higher than by X-ray crystallog- raphy [ 17]. Similarly, many GPCR structures have recently been determined in fully active states coupled to Figure 1. GPCR structures. (A) Cartoon of 2AR indicating the conformational change from the inactive state (blue; PDB ID 2RH1) [ 20] to the active state (purple; PDB ID 3SN6) [ 26] when coupled to a G protein (not shown). ( B) Cryo-EM density for the serotonin 5-HT 1Breceptor coupled to the heterotrimeric G protein G o(PDB ID 6G79, EMDB-4358) [ 79]. The detergent used for puri cation of the receptor was decylmaltoside. ( C) Cryo-EM density for the 1-adrenoceptor coupled to -arrestin (PDB 6TKO, EMDB-10515) [ 9]. The detergent-puri ed receptor was reconstituted into a lipid nanodisc containing a bilayer of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylglycerol and has an external diameter of 13 nm. ( D) Percentage of GPCR structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) determined by cryo-EM per year. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 2, 'content': '( E) Cumulative number of GPCR structures determined by X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM, which includes multiple structures of the same receptor bound to different ligands, different intracellular binding partners and different species. Note that in panels DandEthe data for 2021 includes only the rst 7 months of the year.  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'either a G protein or -arrestin [ 18]. X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM now provide complimentary tools in understanding GPCR structure and function. Here, we provide a comparison of both approaches, their relative merits and future potential. Historical perspective on GPCR structural determination In the 20th century, integral membrane proteins were challenging targets for X-ray crystallography because the small detergents necessary for crystal formation are denaturing and very often inactivated the protein duringpurication [ 15]. Thus, only a handful of very stable membrane proteins were crystallised. The rst structure of a GPCR was that of rhodopsin in the year 2000, as it is naturally abundant and highly stable [ 19]. It took another seven years for the rst ligand-activated receptor (  2-adrenoceptor; 2AR) to be crystallised [ 20,21], closely followed by the 1-adrenoceptor and the adenosine A 2Areceptor the following year [ 22,23]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'These and further advances in GPCR structural biology only occurred due to the development of complimentary tools, strategies and technical developments such as receptor thermostabilisation, receptor-T4 lysozyme fusion pro-teins, lipidic cubic phase (LCP) crystallisation, new detergents and microfocus synchrotron beamlines [ 24,25]. Therst structures of GPCRs were mainly antagonist-bound inactive states or agonist-bound intermediate states. The fully active states of GPCRs are usually only attained when they are coupled to a G protein or-arrestin ( Figure 1A ). Due to the exibility of the complex and dif culties in forming crystal contacts, only two X-ray structures of a GPCR-G protein complex have been published [ 26,27]. Alternative strategies have also been developed to crystallise active states of GPCRs through the use of transducer mimetics, such as a C-terminalpeptide of the -subunit [ 28], conformation-speci c nanobodies [ 2931] and mini-G proteins [ 32,33]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'These structures have been exceedingly informative in studying receptor conformations, but they are still very challen- ging to obtain and the structures did not provide the whole picture of how G proteins couple to receptors. In contrast with X-ray crystallography, cryo-EM has proven to be an ideal technique for determining the structures of GPCR-G protein and GPCR-arrestin complexes. This has arisen from concerted developments over the past 10 years in new electron microscopes, direct electron detectors and image processing software,that together have transformed single-particle cryo-EM [ 3436]. The rst GPCR-G protein cryo-EM structure was determined in 2017 [ 37] and since then there has been an explosion of active state GPCR cryo-EM struc- tures, which include previously intractable GPCR classes [ 38,39], complexes with different G proteins [ 6], -arrestins [ 9,10,12](Figure 1 ) and a G protein-coupled receptor kinase [ 40]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'An inactive state cryo-EM struc- ture of the CGRP receptor in complex with RAMP1 has also been determined, which is currently the smallest GPCR complex (73 kDa of ordered structure) solved by cryo-EM [ 41]. The ease of structure determination by cryo-EM has resulted in a rapid uptake of the technology by the GPCR community ( Figure 1D,E ) with 78% of 99 GPCR structures deposited in the PDB this year ( Jan Jul 2021) determined by cryo-EM. Currently, it is the technical requirements that dictate which technique is used for determining a structure of a GPCR, and theseare discussed in the following sections. Which technique to use, X-ray crystallography or cryo-EM? There are many interrelated factors that in uence the choice of whether to use cryo-EM or X-ray crystallog- raphy to determine a structure of any given GPCR, not least the availability of relevant expertise. However, cur- rently the GPCR itself dictates which route is most feasible and, if time is important, which is the fastest route.The size of the GPCR is the most critical factor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Currently, the lower size limit for the structure determination of a membrane protein is 60 kDa, so it is unrealistic to determine the structure of a 35 45 kDa GPCR in the inactive state by cryo-EM, although structure determination of large Class C receptor dimers (molecular weight180 kDa) in the inactive state has been very successful [ 4244]. In contrast with the inactive state, small GPCRs in the active state coupled to a heterotrimeric G protein (molecular weight of the complex 130 kDa) are well within the range of current cryo-EM technology. Clearly, binding an antibody F abfragment (molecular weight 50 kDa) or two camelid single chain antibodies (nanobodies; each 18 kDa in molecular weight) would be suf cient to increase the size of a GPCR in the inactive state to allow its structure determination by cryo-EM. The use of a F abto increase mass was also essential for the high-resolution structure determination of the1AR-arrestin complex, in addition to its role in stabilising the active state of -arrestin [ 9]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Stability is another key issue that can affect the tractability of GPCR structure determination by X-ray crystal- lography or cryo-EM. Crystal formation often takes days or even weeks and during this time the receptor hasto maintain its structure. This can be enhanced by binding a high-af nity ligand to the receptor which will lock and stabilise the receptor in a preferred conformation [ 45]. Stability may also be enhanced by engineering  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'the receptor through thermostabilising point mutations [ 46] or by binding an antibody [ 47]. In contrast with X-ray crystallography, the preparation of samples for cryo-EM can be performed in a matter of minutes after the sample has been puri ed, hence stability issues are generally better tackled by using cryo-EM. Constraints on time and nancial resources may also be important factors in deciding the best route to determine a GPCR structure, given that the elds of GPCR structural biology and drug discovery are highly competitive. Both X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM require puri ed protein in a stable monodisperse state to allow structure determination. However, extensive engineering of the GPCR is usually necessary to obtain well-diffracting crystals. For example, X-ray crystallographers will invariably remove any exible regions of unstruc- tured protein (N-terminus, C-terminus, intracellular loop) [ 48], remove post-translational modi cation sites (e. g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'N-glycosylation, phosphorylation, palmitoylation etc) [ 48] and may make chimeras with well-folded proteins (e.g. T4 lysozyme, cytochrome b 562)[49] to try and get well-diffracting crystals. In addition, if the receptor is unstable, thermostabilising mutations may have to be found and combined to make a suf ciently stable recep- tor [ 46]. Very often this is an iterative process, where poor crystals lead to further engineering until well- diffracting crystals can be obtained. This whole process may take years, and sometimes well-diffracting crystals are never obtained. In contrast, cryo-EM can be performed on receptors that contain unstructured regions and variable amounts of post-translational modi cations, so sometimes it is possible to determine the structure of the native wild type receptor [ 38]. Receptor engineering may only be required to improve poor expression or if proteolysis of unstructured regions results in the loss of puri cation tags. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Cryo-EM is also more tolerant than X-ray crystallography in terms of sample quality and quantity, as small amounts of puri ed protein ( 100mg), with some degree of receptor heterogeneity and the presence of con- taminants can still allow a cryo-EM structure to be determined, but would invariably prevent the formation of good crystals. This is because processing of cryo-EM images can separate molecules of receptor with the sameconformation and use these to determine a structure. Thus, out of 5 10 million particles in a typical cryo-EM dataset, only 100 000 300 000 particles may be used to form the nal cryo-EM map. In contrast, in a GPCR crystal every molecule needs to be precisely aligned with its identical neighbour to be able to generate a diffrac-tion pattern suitable to determine an electron density map. In a single thin GPCR crystal 1020mm long there are about a billion identical molecules, which is 10 000 times more than is required for a cryo-EM structure. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Another aspect of the time constraint issue is if multiple structures of the same receptor are required, such as when SBDD is being used to develop novel therapeutics [ 18]. Once a receptor has been crystallised and its structure determined, it can often be very fast to determine new structures bound to different ligands as thecrystals can grow under similar conditions and molecular replacement can be used to rapidly determine the structure from the X-ray diffraction data. In some cases, it is even possible to soak crystals of GPCRs and deter- mine multiple structures from one crystallisation experiment and one trip to collect diffraction data [ 50]. In contrast, with cryo-EM there is no equivalent to molecular replacement and each structure takes a similar time to determine, which is often days to weeks compared with a few hours for molecular replacement in X-ray crystallography. Resolution of structures Historically, cryo-EM has yielded structures of lower resolution compared with X-ray crystallography. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'However,the dramatic developments in single-particle cryo-EM have resulted in a resolution revolution [16] with recent structures of model proteins reaching atomic resolution (1.2 ) [ 51,52]. The improvement in resolution has also been observed for GPCR complexes. In 2019 with the rst dozen GPCR-G protein complexes solved [ 53] the average resolution was 3.76  with the best being 3.3 . In comparison, in the rst six months of 2021, 48 GPCR-G protein cryo-EM structures were determined (21 unique receptors) with an average resolution of 3.11  (highest resolution, 1.95 ) [ 54] and 16 structures with resolutions below 3 . The resolution of these structures is comparable to standard X-ray crystallography and has been achieved through further develop- ments in cryo-EM technology [ 55]. In cryo-EM structures, density maps may show large variations in resolution throughout the receptor, with the core of the receptor often having the highest resolution and the loop regions the lowest resolution. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 4, 'content': 'This reects the exibility of many loop regions compared with the receptor core where side chains are packed together and there are fewer motions. New methods are being developed to allow models to be built fromsuch regions of density [ 56]. In X-ray structures, the map quality is often more uniform than in cryo-EM structures, although exible loops will also not be resolved. However, loops that are involved in crystal contacts  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 5, 'content': 'may be de ned by clear densities, although care must be taken in their interpretation, as discussed in the fol- lowing section. User beware: crystal contacts Every structure has caveats, which in uences deductions that can be drawn from the structure and the infer- ences made on the behaviour of the protein in vivo . It is reassuring to know that structures of the same GPCR determined by different groups using different techniques are largely identical (within experimental error and when the resolution has been suf cient for con dent modelling). It is also gratifying that this holds true for a cryo-EM structure compared with a crystal structure [ 57]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 5, 'content': 'However, there are always minor differences and, because the activity of a receptor can be affected by subtle changes in, for example, an extracellular loop, then if differences are observed between structures, the question arises whether these have arisen as a consequence of the technique used to obtain the structures or whether they are of biological signi cance. Below is a selection of observations that we have made in our own laboratory over the past 15 years. The conformation of loops in crystal structures can be affected by the environment and crystal contacts. This is demonstrated by the crystallisation of 1AR in detergent or in lipidic cubic phase where the same ligand, truncations and deletions were present in both constructs; differences were greatest in the loop regions and the ends of the transmembrane regions, whilst the core of the receptors were virtually identical ( Figure 2D )[58]. Crystal contacts can be very strong and can cause a transmembrane helix to kink through 60 as seen whencomparing chain A and B in the  1AR structure (PDB ID 2vt4, Figure 2A ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 5, 'content': 'In the case of carmoterol-bound 1AR, crystal contacts at the top of H7 in chain A forced a change in ligand binding pose, causing it to shift slightly, resulting in a different pose of the methylphenoxy group of carmoterol in comparison with chain B Figure 2. Artefacts in X-ray crystallography. (A) 60 kink of H1 in chain A (brown) of 1AR compared with chain B (green); PDB ID 2VT4 [ 23]. (B) Different pose of the methylphenoxy moiety of carmoterol in chain A (brown) compared with chain B (green); PDB ID 2Y02 [ 59]. (C) The salt bridge in the extracellular region of A 2AR determined in the crystal structure at pH 4.8 (PDB ID 5G53) [ 32] is absent from the cryo-EM structure determined at pH 7.5 (PDB ID 6GDG) [ 57]. (D) The RMSD differences (rainbow colouration) between 1AR crystallised in detergent (PDB ID 2VT4) compared with 1AR crystallised in lipidic cubic phase (PDB ID 4BVN) were determined and plotted on the structure (red, large differences; dark blue, no differences) [ 58]. Panel 2D has been reproduced from [ 58].  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 5, 'content': "2349Biochemical Society Transactions (2021) 492345 2355 https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20210431Downloaded from http://portlandpress.com/biochemsoctrans/article-pdf/49/5/2345/923627/bst-2021-0431c.pdf by St Jude Children's Research Hospital user on 07 September 2023 ", 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'where the crystal contact is absent ( Figure 2B )[59]. Crystallisation may also only occur at non-physiological pH, as was observed for the X-ray structure of A 2AR-mini-G s[32] which crystallised at pH 4.8. A salt bridge was observed between His264 and E169 in the entrance to the orthosteric binding site, which could be import- ant in ligand binding ( Figure 2C )[60]. However, in the cryo-EM structure determined at pH 7.5, the salt bridge was absent as the respective residues were further apart and adopted different rotamers. Of course, in cryo-EM structures there are no crystal contacts, which avoids the potential pitfalls observed in X-ray structures. Access to conformational dynamics of structures A signi cant advantage of cryo-EM over X-ray crystallography is the ability to determine structures of exible complexes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'This has been demonstrated with the structure determination of a megacomplex formed between Gs-coupled 2AR with -arrestin bound to the C-terminus of the receptor, and stabilised through the binding of three different antibodies [ 61]. The complex was very exible and initially the overall resolution was only 7 . However, the separate complexes within the whole structure were masked and individually re ned to 3.8 4 resolution, and subsequently rigid-body tted into the 7  map. This is not possible in X-ray crystallography. Protein particles vitri ed in solution on a cryo-EM grid preserves the conformational space sampled before freezing. This means that it is possible to access structural information about the conformational landscape of the protein, which for GPCRs is highly relevant given their dynamic nature and wide conformational landscape [62,63]. In contrast, X-ray crystallography can, at best, generate a series of snapshots of a receptor in different conformations, provided that each state can be suitably stabilised and crystallised using, for example, different ligands or antibodies. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'In cryo-EM, 3-dimensional classi cation based on maximum likelihood is able to distin- guish different discrete conformations occurring in a single dataset of a protein. For example, the neurotensinreceptor NTSR1 coupled to G idisplayed two different conformations [ 64], the canonical conformation similar to other GPCR-G o/icomplexes, and a less abundant non-canonical conformation. The G iheterotrimer in the latter structure had a more rigid nucleotide-binding domain and the receptor adopted features of both activeand inactive states, suggesting this conformation was on the activation pathway to form the non-canonical con- formation. Differentially populated conformations have also been described for the mGluA2 structure [ 65]. Aside from discrete conformations, recent computational advances have allowed the analysis of continuous motion within receptors. Systematic variability analysis performed on cryo-EM datasets applies 3-dimensional probabilistic principal component analyses (PPCA) to the data [ 66]. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'This describes a continuum of movements within a cryo-EM dataset and has been performed on GPCR-G protein complexes of the cannabinoid-1 recep-tor [66], the adrenomedullin receptor [ 67], the secretin receptor [ 68] and rhodopsin [ 69]. The motions present within the different complexes appear to be similar, providing structural information on transient states that might be important to the activation mechanism. X-ray free electrons lasers have also been used to extractdynamic information of GPCRs [ 70,71], but there is always the possibility that lattice contacts impose restric- tions on receptor mobility. New biology from cryo-EM structures of GPCRs An interesting consequence of using cryo-EM to solve GPCR structures has been the discovery of unexpected biology. This has arisen through the ability to express small amounts of protein in insect or mammalian cellsand not having to extensively engineer the receptor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'For example, the structure of the yeast mating factor recep- tor Ste2 was determined from the wild type protein, where unexpectedly the N-terminus of the receptor that was predicted to be unstructured was important in forming a domain-swapped dimer interface [ 38]. In another example, the GPR97-G ocomplex was expressed and puri ed from insect cells, and the cryo-EM structure allowed identi cation of [ 72] palmitoylation at Cys351 in the G protein -subunit that was essential for G protein coupling. There are also cases where insights into lipids have been made possible through the use of mild detergents in the preparation of receptors for cryo-EM. For example, the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate was observed at the interface between the serotonin 5HT 1Areceptor and G i, which was shown subsequently to be an import- ant factor in G icoupling [ 73]. Lipids are also frequently observed in X-ray structures, but very often these are of mono-olein and cholesterol which are present in large excess during lipid cubic phase crystallisation experi- ments. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Cholesteryl hemisuccinate (CHS) is also often added to detergents during GPCR puri cation to improve receptor stability and CHS will therefore be present upon structure determination by cryo-EM. Caution must, therefore, be given to the assignment of lipid densities to cholesterol, for example, in GPCR structures these  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 7, 'content': 'densities should be assumed to be CHS unless mass spectrometry identi es cholesterol in the puri ed receptor. The ability of cryo-EM to determine structures of receptors in lipid nanodiscs or in lipid-enriched detergent micelles, will increase our knowledge of the structural role for lipids in GPCR complexes [ 9,10]. Future perspectives X-ray crystallography is a mature technology that has transformed our understanding of the structure and func- tion of GPCRs. In contrast, single-particle cryo-EM has only recently realised its potential in the GPCR eld for routinely producing data at suf cient resolution for model building. The ease of preparing samples for cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography makes cryo-EM the method of choice for determining structures of GPCRs coupled to G proteins and arrestins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Detergent-solubilised receptors have dominated recent struc- tures, but the increasing focus on the importance of lipids means that more structures will undoubtedly bedetermined of receptors embedded in a lipid nanodisc, a platform that is not amenable to analysis by X-ray crystallography. Cryo-EM also permits the possibility of time-resolved studies [ 74], where G proteins and recep- tors can be mixed and vitri ed with a time resolution of 10 msec; this has the potential to identify the pathway of G protein engagement to a receptor. There is no doubt that cryo-EM will continue to develop, with better microscopes, detectors and software that will make it easier and faster to determine structures of even small proteins [ 75,76]. This will mean that cryo-EM will compete directly with areas where X-ray crystallography currently has the advantage, namely rapidly producing multiple structures of the same receptor for SBDD. The development of cheaper microscopes will have a signi cant democratising effect on the eld [77], allowing multiple electron microscopes to be avail- able at all research centres in academia and industry, accelerating progress even further. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 7, 'content': 'According to theoret- ical calculations, it should be possible to determine the structure of a 38 kDa protein by single-particle cryo-EM [ 78]. Given the current rate of advancements in the eld, it is only a matter of a few years before structures of the inactive states of small GPCRs can be determined routinely without the requirement for anti- bodies or other binding partners. Conclusions Cryo-EM has rapidly become the method of choice for the determination of GPCR structures coupled to either a G protein or -arrestin, and in many instances has become almost routine. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Single-particle cryo-EM has opened up new avenues of investigation in GPCR structure biology, including the study of transientTable 1 Advantages and disadvantages of cryo-EM versus X-ray crystallography Cryo-EM X-ray crystallography Sample Membrane protein can be in any detergent or nanodiscSpecific detergents required Requires mg amounts of protein Requires mg amounts of protein Can tolerate certain degree of sample impurity and heterogeneityRequires pure and homogenous protein No protein engineeing necessary to remove flexible regions, post-translational modification sites or thermostabilisationExtensive protein engineering required to get well-diffracting crystals Structure determinationDoes not require crystallization Requires crystallization Preferential orientation of the particles may hinder structure determination and/or reduce theresolutionCrystals may not form or be insufficiently ordered to yield a structure Can provide lower resolution information All or nothing result Slow collection and processing High speed in data collection and processing Electron microscopes may be in-house, allowing fast data collection. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 7, 'content': 'If electron microscopes arenot in-house, then access could be slowed considerably.Requires access to synchrotron sources that are national facilities, which could slow access forcrystal screening and data collection Structure analysisNo crystal contacts present Crystal contacts might induce structural artefacts Molecules sample conformational landscape as insolutionRestricted access to dynamics  2021 The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the Biochemical Society and distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 8, 'content': 'intermediates, continuous motions and structure determination of exible complexes. It is only a matter of time before single-particle cryo-EM will allow structure determination of GPCRs in a native state on its own within a lipid bilayer, without requiring protein engineering or binding partners. Perspectives GPCRs are the largest family of receptors in humans and are also the most targeted family of proteins by drugs. Structural biology has been essential to understand the molecular pharma- cology of GPCRs and to provide a foundation for next generation drugs with improved speci - city and reduced side effects. Cryo-EM is the preferred technique to determine GPCR structures in the active state coupled to a G protein or arrestin. Currently, X-ray crystallography remains the preferred technique forstructure determination of GPCRs in the inactive state as they are usually too small for cryo-EM. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Structure determination of GPCRs: cryo-EM compared with X-ray crystallography', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The technology of single-particle cryo-EM is developing rapidly and will within a few years become the preferred technique for structure determination of any state of a GPCR. This is because it will be very fast and cheap, as extensive protein engineering and crystal optimisa-tion are not required. Competing Interests C.G.T. is a shareholder, consultant and member of the Scienti c Advisory Board of Sosei Heptares, a GPCR drug Discovery company. J.G.N. declares no con icts of interest. Funding The work in C.G.T. s laboratory is funded by the Medical Research Council [MRC U105197215] and Sosei Heptares. The work in J.G.-N. s laboratory is funded by the Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovacin y Universidades (PID2020-113359GA-I00), the Beca Leonardo a Investigadores y Creadores Culturales 2020 de la Fundacin BBVA (IN[20]_CMA_BIO_0082), the Spanish Ramn y Cajal program and the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 1, 'content': '*For correspondence: madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk (MMB); mwwang@simm.ac.cn (M-WW); zhaosw@shanghaitech.edu.cn (SZ) These authors contributed equally to this work Competing interests: The authors declare that no competing interests exist. Funding: See page 20 Received: 17 July 2019 Accepted: 19 December 2019 Published: 19 December 2019 Reviewing editor: Yibing Shan, DE Shaw Research, United States Copyright Zhou et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 1, 'content': 'This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use and redistribution provided that the original author and source are credited.Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs Qingtong Zhou1, Dehua Yang2,3,4, Meng Wu1,3,5, Yu Guo1,3,5, Wanjing Guo2,3,4, Li Zhong2,3,4, Xiaoqing Cai2,4, Antao Dai2,4, Wonjo Jang6, Eugene I Shakhnovich7, Zhi-Jie Liu1,5, Raymond C Stevens1,5, Nevin A Lambert6, M Madan Babu8*, Ming-Wei Wang2,3,4,5,9*, Suwen Zhao1,5* 1iHuman Institute, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China;2The CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China;3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China;4The National Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China;5School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China;6Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, United States;7Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, United States;8MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom;9School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai, China Abstract Class A G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) influence virtually every aspect of human physiology. Understanding receptor activation mechanism is critical for discovering novel therapeutics since about one-third of all marketed drugs target members of this family. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 1, 'content': 'GPCR activation is an allosteric process that couples agonist binding to G-protein recruitment, with the hallmark outward movement of transmembrane helix 6 (TM6). However, what leads to TM6 movement and the key residue level changes of this movement remain less well understood. Here, we report a framework to quantify conformational changes. By analyzing the conformational changes in 234 structures from 45 class A GPCRs, we discovered a common GPCR activation pathway comprising of 34 residue pairs and 35 residues. The pathway unifies previous findings into a common activation mechanism and strings together the scattered key motifs such as CWxP, DRY, Na+pocket, NPxxY and PIF, thereby directly linking the bottom of ligand-binding pocket with G-protein coupling region. Site-directed mutagenesis experiments support this proposition and reveal that rational mutations of residues in this pathway can be used to obtain receptors that are constitutively active or inactive. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 1, 'content': 'The common activation pathway provides the mechanistic interpretation of constitutively activating, inactivating and disease mutations. As a module responsible for activation, the common pathway allows for decoupling of the evolution of the ligand binding site and G-protein-binding region. Such an architecture might have facilitated GPCRs to emerge as a highly successful family of proteins for signal transduction in nature. Introduction As the largest and most diverse group of membrane receptors in eukaryotes, GPCRs mediate a wide variety of physiological functions ( Lagerstro m and Schio th, 2008 ;Rosenbaum et al., 2009 ; Katritch et al., 2012 ;Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013 ;Katritch et al., 2013 ), including vision, olfac- tion, taste, neurotransmission, endocrine and immune responses via more than 800 family members, and are involved in many diseases ( Rana et al., 2001 ;Smit et al., 2007 ;Vassart and Costagliola, Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 2, 'content': '2011 ;Thompson et al., 2014 ;Hauser et al., 2018 ). Therefore, GPCRs are important drug targets. There are 475 marketed drugs ( ~34% of all FDA-approved therapeutic agent agents) targeting 108 members of the GPCR superfamily ( Hauser et al., 2018 ;Hauser et al., 2017 ;Allen and Roth, 2011 ). Class A is the largest and most diverse GPCR subfamily in humans ( Kolakowski, 1994 ; Bockaert and Pin, 1999 ;Fredriksson et al., 2003 ;Isberg et al., 2016 ), including 388 olfactory (Krautwurst et al., 1998 ;Spehr and Munger, 2009 ) and 286 non-olfactory receptors ( Pandy- Szekeres et al., 2018 ;Munk et al., 2019 ) (Figure 1a ). They share a seven-transmembrane (7TM) helices domain, with ligand binding pocket and G-protein-binding region located in the extracellular and intracellular ends of the helix bundle. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Responding to a wide variety of extracellular signals ranged from small molecules to peptides even proteins, the extracellular facing ligand-binding pock- ets have evolved to be highly diverse in both shape and sequences ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013 ; Ngo et al., 2017 ;Vass et al., 2018 ). Similarly, the G-protein-binding regions are also quite diverse in sequences, modulating the activity of different signalling pathways by recruiting dozens of hetero- trimeric G proteins ( Rasmussen et al., 2011a ;Du et al., 2019 ;Liu et al., 2019a ), arrestins (Gainetdinov et al., 2004 ;Zhou et al., 2017 ;Yang et al., 2018 ;Latorraca et al., 2018 ), GPCR kin- ases ( Komolov et al., 2017 ) in a ligand-specific manner. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Residues that connect the ligand-binding pocket to the G-protein-coupling region are significantly more conserved ( Ballesteros and Wein- stein, 1995 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ), with evolutionarily conserved sequence motifs (CWxP [ Eddy et al., 2018 ;Filipek, 2019 ;Wescott et al., 2016 ;Tehan et al., 2014 ;Holst et al., 2010 ;Nygaard et al., 2009 ;Hofmann et al., 2009 ;Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ], PIF [ Ballesteros and Weinstein, 1995 ; Ishchenko et al., 2017 ;Schonegge et al., 2017 ;Kato et al., 2019 ] Na+pocket [ Eddy et al., 2018 ; Filipek, 2019 ;Liu et al., 2012 ;Yuan et al., 2013 ;Fenalti et al., 2014 ;Katritch et al., 2014 ; Figure 1. An increasing number of reported class A GPCR structures facilitates studies on common activation mechanism. ( a) Distribution of structures in different states in the non-olfactory class A GPCR tree as of October 1, 2018. ( b) Common GPCR activation mechanism and the residue-level triggers are not well understood. The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 1: Source data 1. The released class A GPCR structures (as of October 1, 2018). Source data 2. Disease mutations occurred in class A GPCRs. Figure supplement 1. The pattern of conservation of residues and the map of number of disease-associated mutations in human class A GPCRs. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 2, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 2 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Vickery et al., 2018 ;White et al., 2018 ;Ye et al., 2018 ;Chen et al., 2019 ], NPxxY [Rasmussen et al., 2011a ;Filipek, 2019 ;Wescott et al., 2016 ;Nygaard et al., 2009 ; Hofmann et al., 2009 ;Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ;Schonegge et al., 2017 ;Chen et al., 2019 ; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ] and DRY [ Schonegge et al., 2017 ;Alhadeff et al., 2018 ; Jacobson et al., 2014 ;Feng et al., 2017 ;Roth et al., 2017 ;Shihoya et al., 2017 ;Yuan et al., 2014 ]) scattered in the intracellular half of the 7TM domain ( Figure 1figure supplement 1 ). GPCR activation is agonist binding induced G-protein recruitment ( Eddy et al., 2018 ; Christopoulos and Kenakin, 2002 ;Manglik et al., 2015 ;Staus et al., 2016 ;DeVree et al., 2016 ). It is an allosteric process ( Gilchrist, 2007 ;May et al., 2007 ;Christopoulos, 2014 ;Latorraca et al., 2017 ), transducing various external stimuli into cellular responses. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Understanding the activation mechanism of GPCR is of paramount importance in pharmacology research and drug discovery. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Tre- mendous previous efforts, involving sequence analysis, structural, biophysical, biochemical and computational approaches such as X-ray ( Popov et al., 2018 ;Roth et al., 2008 ;Warne et al., 2009 ;Carpenter et al., 2016 ;Nehme et al., 2017 ;Tsai et al., 2018 ;Rasmussen et al., 2011b ; Pardon et al., 2014 ;Rosenbaum et al., 2007 ;Kobilka and Schertler, 2008 ;Cherezov et al., 2007 ; Ghosh et al., 2015 ;Cherezov et al., 2004 ;Caffrey and Cherezov, 2009 ;Liu et al., 2013 ; Weierstall et al., 2014 ;Stauch and Cherezov, 2018 ;Zhang et al., 2015 ), NMR ( Ye et al., 2018 ; Chen et al., 2019 ;Nygaard et al., 2013 ;Lamichhane et al., 2015 ;Isogai et al., 2016 ; Sounier et al., 2015 ;Ye et al., 2016 ;Shimada et al., 2019 ), Cryo-EM ( Liang et al., 2017 ; Zhang et al., 2017 ;Cheng, 2018 ;Renaud et al., 2018 ), labeling biosensors ( Irannejad et al., 2013 ; Tian et al., 2017 ), FRET ( Gregorio et al., 2017 ;Halls and Canals, 2018 ;Sandhu et al., 2019 ), BRET ( Lan et al., 2012 ;Lee et al., 2016 ;Okashah et al., 2019 ), DEER ( Wingler et al., 2019 ; Van Eps et al., 2018 ;Dror et al., 2015 ), molecular dynamic simulations ( Yuan et al., 2013 ; Dror et al., 2015 ;Dror et al., 2011a ;Dror et al., 2011b ;Dror et al., 2013 ;Miao et al., 2013 ; Bhattacharya and Vaidehi, 2014 ;Kohlhoff et al., 2014 ;Ciancetta et al., 2015 ;Alhadeff et al., 2018 ), evolutionary tracing ( Madabushi et al., 2004 ;Schoneberg et al., 2007 ;Rodriguez et al., 2010 ), molecular docking ( Kufareva et al., 2011 ;Jacobson et al., 2014 ;Kooistra et al., 2016 ; Miao et al., 2016 ;Feng et al., 2017 ;Roth et al., 2017 ;Lyu et al., 2019 ;Cooke et al., 2015 ) and mutagenesis ( Schonegge et al., 2017 ;Sung et al., 2016 ;Massink et al., 2015 ;Ragnarsson et al., 2019 ;Hulme, 2013 ) have been made to study the allosteric nature of GPCRs including but not lim- ited to receptor activation ( Wescott et al., 2016 ;Tehan et al., 2014 ;Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ;Isom and Doh', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Tre- mendous previous efforts, involving sequence analysis, structural, biophysical, biochemical and computational approaches such as X-ray ( Popov et al., 2018 ;Roth et al., 2008 ;Warne et al., 2009 ;Carpenter et al., 2016 ;Nehme et al., 2017 ;Tsai et al., 2018 ;Rasmussen et al., 2011b ; Pardon et al., 2014 ;Rosenbaum et al., 2007 ;Kobilka and Schertler, 2008 ;Cherezov et al., 2007 ; Ghosh et al., 2015 ;Cherezov et al., 2004 ;Caffrey and Cherezov, 2009 ;Liu et al., 2013 ; Weierstall et al., 2014 ;Stauch and Cherezov, 2018 ;Zhang et al., 2015 ), NMR ( Ye et al., 2018 ; Chen et al., 2019 ;Nygaard et al., 2013 ;Lamichhane et al., 2015 ;Isogai et al., 2016 ; Sounier et al., 2015 ;Ye et al., 2016 ;Shimada et al., 2019 ), Cryo-EM ( Liang et al., 2017 ; Zhang et al., 2017 ;Cheng, 2018 ;Renaud et al., 2018 ), labeling biosensors ( Irannejad et al., 2013 ; Tian et al., 2017 ), FRET ( Gregorio et al., 2017 ;Halls and Canals, 2018 ;Sandhu et al., 2019 ), BRET ( Lan et al., lman, 2015 ;Okada et al., 2001 ;Hunyady et al., 2003 ;Dalton et al., 2015 ;Lans et al., 2015 ), G protein activation ( Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ; Flock et al., 2017 ;Flock et al., 2015 ;Furness et al., 2016 ;Glukhova et al., 2018 ;Ilyaskina et al., 2018 ;Inoue et al., 2019 ;Weis and Kobilka, 2018 ), biased agonism ( McCorvy et al., 2018 ; Onaran et al., 2014 ;Schmid et al., 2017 ;Smith et al., 2018 ;Tan et al., 2018 ;Whalen et al., 2011 ;Wootten et al., 2018 ;Wootten et al., 2016 ;Masureel et al., 2018 ), ligand efficiency (Gregorio et al., 2017 ;Furness et al., 2016 ;Livingston et al., 2018 ;Solt et al., 2017 ;Yao et al., 2009 ), allosteric modulators ( Thal et al., 2018 ;Kruse et al., 2013 ;Leach et al., 2007 ;Liu et al., 2019b ;Lu and Zhang, 2019 ;Robertson et al., 2018 ;Shao et al., 2019 ;Wu et al., 2019 ; Zheng et al., 2016 ;Ortiz Zacar as et al., 2018 ;Jaeger et al., 2019 ;Hollingsworth et al., 2019 ; Liu et al., 2017 ;Chaturvedi et al., 2018 ;Oswald et al., 2016 ), and inverse a', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Tre- mendous previous efforts, involving sequence analysis, structural, biophysical, biochemical and computational approaches such as X-ray ( Popov et al., 2018 ;Roth et al., 2008 ;Warne et al., 2009 ;Carpenter et al., 2016 ;Nehme et al., 2017 ;Tsai et al., 2018 ;Rasmussen et al., 2011b ; Pardon et al., 2014 ;Rosenbaum et al., 2007 ;Kobilka and Schertler, 2008 ;Cherezov et al., 2007 ; Ghosh et al., 2015 ;Cherezov et al., 2004 ;Caffrey and Cherezov, 2009 ;Liu et al., 2013 ; Weierstall et al., 2014 ;Stauch and Cherezov, 2018 ;Zhang et al., 2015 ), NMR ( Ye et al., 2018 ; Chen et al., 2019 ;Nygaard et al., 2013 ;Lamichhane et al., 2015 ;Isogai et al., 2016 ; Sounier et al., 2015 ;Ye et al., 2016 ;Shimada et al., 2019 ), Cryo-EM ( Liang et al., 2017 ; Zhang et al., 2017 ;Cheng, 2018 ;Renaud et al., 2018 ), labeling biosensors ( Irannejad et al., 2013 ; Tian et al., 2017 ), FRET ( Gregorio et al., 2017 ;Halls and Canals, 2018 ;Sandhu et al., 2019 ), BRET ( Lan et al., gonism (Chaturvedi et al., 2018 ;Oswald et al., 2016 ;Hori et al., 2018 ;Nagiri et al., 2019 ;Peng et al., 2018 ;Shihoya et al., 2017 ). Starting from the first structure of a GPCR-G protein complex ( b2AR- Gs) (Rasmussen et al., 2011a ), the rapidly growing structures of receptor-G-protein complex have provided excellent opportunity to better understand receptor conformation changes upon activa- tion. Meanwhile, mutagenesis studies on different receptors also identified functional roles of key residues in receptor activation, one good example is CXCR4 ( Wescott et al., 2016 ), where a large- scale mutagenesis study covering all 352 residues of the receptor identified 41 amino acids that are required for signalling induced by agonist CXCL12. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Notably, family-wide analysis on GPCR activation with the concept of residue contacts ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013 ;Flock et al., 2017 ; Kayikci et al., 2018 ) have revealed the converged activation pathway near the G-protein-coupling region ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ) and selectivity determinants of GPCRG-protein binding (Flock et al., 2017 ). While these studies have provided key insights into GPCR activation mechanism for individual receptors or specific motifs, a family-wide common activation mechanism that directly connect ligand-binding pocket and G-protein-coupling region has yet to be discovered. Although it Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'is well established that outward movement of transmembrane helix 6 (TM6) upon ligand binding is a common feature of receptor activation, the residue level changes that trigger the movement of TM6 remain less well understood ( Figure 1b ). Receptor activation requires global reorganization of residue contacts as well as water-mediated interactions ( Yuan et al., 2014 ;Yuan et al., 2016 ;Venkatakrishnan et al., 2019 ). Since prior studies primarily investigated conformational changes through visual inspection ( Tehan et al., 2014 ; Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ) or through the presence or absence of non-covalent contacts between residues ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ;Flock et al., 2017 ), we reasoned that one could gain com- prehensive knowledge about mechanism of receptor activation by developing approaches that can capture not just the presence or absence of a contact but also subtle, and potentially important alterations in conformations upon receptor activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Results A residue-residue contact score-based framework to characterize GPCR conformational changes To address this, we developed an approach to rigorously quantify residue contacts in proteins struc- tures and infer statistically significant conformational changes. We first defined a residue-residue contact score (RRCS) which is an atomic distance-based calculation that quantifies the strength of contact between residue pairs ( Ngo et al., 2017 ) by summing up all possible inter-residue heavy atom pairs ( Figure 2a andFigure 2figure supplement 1a ). We then defined DRRCS, which is the difference in RRCS of a residue pair between any two conformational states of a receptor that quan- titatively describes the rearrangements of residue contacts ( Figure 2b andFigure 2figure supple- ment 1b ). While RRCS can be 0 (no contact) or higher (stronger contact), DRRCS can be negative (loss in strength of residue contact), positive (gain in strength of residue contact) or 0 (no change in strength of residue contact). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'To capture the entirety of conformational changes in receptor structure upon activation, we computed the DRRCS between the active and inactive states of a receptor and defined two types of conformational changes ( Figure 2c ): (i) switching contacts: these are contacts that are present in the inactive state but lost in the active state (or vicw versa) such as loss of intra- helical contacts between D/E3/C249(GPCRdb numbering [ Isberg et al., 2016 ]) and R3/C250, and gain of inter-helical hydrophobic contacts between residues at 3 /C240 and 6 /C248 upon receptor activation; and (ii) repacking contacts: these are contacts that result in an increase or decrease in residue pack- ing such as the decreased packing of intra-helical side-chain contacts between W6/C248and F6/C244, and the increase in inter-helical residue packing due to the translocation of N7/C249toward D2/C250upon receptor activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'In this manner, we quantified the global, local, major and subtle conformational changes in a systematic way (i.e. inter-helical and intra-helical, switching and repacking contacts). We then analyzed 234 structures of 45 class A GPCRs that were grouped into three categories (Figure 1a ): (i) antagonist- or inverse agonist-bound (inactive; 142 structures from 38 receptors); (ii) both agonist- and G protein/G protein mimetic-bound (fully active; 27 structures from eight recep- tors); and (iii) agonist-bound (intermediate; 65 structures from 15 receptors). Among them, six recep- tors [rhodopsin (bRho) ( Li et al., 2004 ;Choe et al., 2011 ),b2-adrenergic receptor ( b2AR) (Rasmussen et al., 2011a ;Cherezov et al., 2007 ), M2 muscarinic receptor (M2R) ( Kruse et al., 2013 ;Haga et al., 2012 ),m-opioid receptor ( mOR) ( Manglik et al., 2012 ;Huang et al., 2015 ), aden- osine A 2Areceptor (A 2AR) (Carpenter et al., 2016 ;Jaakola et al., 2008 ) and k-opioid receptor ( k- OR) ( Wu et al., 2012 ;Che et al., 2018 )] have both inactive- and active-state crystal structures avail- able. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Given that DRRCS can capture major and subtle conformational changes, we computed RRCS for all structures and DRRCS for the six pairs of receptors and investigated the existence of a com- mon activation pathway (i.e. a common set of residue contact changes) across class A GPCRs. Two criteria ( Figure 2d ; further details in Materials and methods) were applied to identify conserved rear- rangements of residue contacts: (i) equivalent residue pairs show a similar and substantial change in RRCS between the active and inactive state structures of each of the six receptors (i.e. the same sign ofDRRCS and | DRRCS| > cut-off for all receptors) and (ii) family-wide comparison of the RRCS for the 142 inactive and 27 active state structures shows a statistically significant difference (p<0.001; two sample t-test). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 4, 'content': 'This allowed us to reliably capture both the major rearrangements as well as subtle but conserved conformational changes at the level of individual residues in diverse GPCRs in a Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Figure 2. Understanding GPCR activation mechanism by RRCS and DRRCS. ( a) Comparison of residue contact (RC) ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ) and residue residue contact score (RRCS) calculations. RRCS can describe the strength of residue-residue contact quantitatively in a much more accurate manner than the Boolean descriptor RC. ( b) RRCS and DRRCS calculation for a pair of active and inactive structures can capture receptor Figure 2 continued on next page Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'statistically robust and significant manner. Consistent with this, a comparison with earlier studies revealed that the RRCS based approach is able to capture a larger number of conserved large-scale and subtle changes in residues contacts ( Figure 2d ) that would have been missed by visual inspec- tion or residue contact presence/absence criteria alone (see Materials and methods for conceptual advance of this approach and detailed comparison). Discovery of a common and conserved receptor activation pathway Remarkably, for the first time, our analysis of the structures allowed the discovery of a common and conserved activation pathway that directly links ligand-binding pocket and G protein-coupling regions in class A GPCRs ( Figure 3 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'The pathway is comprised of 34 residue pairs (formed by 35 res- idues) with conserved rearrangement of residue contacts upon activation ( Figure 2d ), connecting several well-known but structurally and spatially disconnected motifs (CWxP, PIF, Na+pocket, NPxxY and DRY) all the way from the extracellular side (where the ligand binds) to the intracellular side (where the G-protein binds). Inspection of the rewired contacts as a DRRCS network reveals that the conserved receptor activation pathway is of modular nature and involves conformational changes in four layers. In layer 1, there is a conserved signal initiation step involving changes in residue contacts at the bottom of the ligand-binding pocket and Na+pocket. In layer 2, critical hydrophobic contacts are broken ( i.e., opening of the hydrophobic lock). In layer 3, microswitch residues (6 /C237, Y7/C253) are rewired and in layer 4, the residue R3/C250and G protein contacting positions are rewired, making them competent to bind to G protein on the cytosolic side ( Figure 3 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Strikingly, recently released cryo-EM structures of four receptors (5-HT 1B, rhodopsin, A 1R and mOR) in complex with G i/ o(Glukhova et al., 2018 ;Garc a-Nafr a et al., 2018 ;Kang et al., 2018 ;Koehl et al., 2018 ;Draper- Joyce et al., 2018 ;Tsai et al., 2018 ) also support the conservation of contacts involving these 34 residue pairs ( Figure 4 ,Figure 4figure supplements 1 and2). These observations highlight the conserved and common nature of a previously undescribed activation pathway linking ligand binding to G-protein coupling, regardless of the subtypes of intracellular effectors ( i.e., G s (Rasmussen et al., 2011a ;Carpenter et al., 2016 ), G i/o(Glukhova et al., 2018 ;Garc a-Nafr a et al., 2018 ;Kang et al., 2018 ;Koehl et al., 2018 ;Draper-Joyce et al., 2018 ;Tsai et al., 2018 ), arrestin (Zhou et al., 2017 ;Kang et al., 2015 ) or G-protein mimetic nanobody/peptide ( Rasmussen et al., 2011b ;Kruse et al., 2013 ;Choe et al., 2011 ;Huang et al., 2015 ;Che et al., 2018 ),Figure 4a ). Collectively, these findings illustrate how a combination of intra-helical and inter-helical switching contacts as well as repacking contacts underlies the common activation mechanism of GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Molecular insights into key steps of the common activation pathway Receptor activation is triggered by ligand binding and is characterised by movements of different transmembrane helices. How does ligand-induced receptor activation connect the different and highly conserved motifs, rewire residue contacts and result in the observed changes in transmem- brane helices? To this end, we analyzed the common activation pathway in detail and mapped, where possible, how they influence helix packing, rotation and movement ( Figure 3 ). A qualitative analysis suggests the presence of four layers of residues in the pathway linking the ligand binding residues to the G-protein-binding region. Layer 1: We did not see a single ligand-residue contact that exhibits conserved rearrangement, which accurately reflects the diverse repertoire of ligands that bind GPCRs ( Katritch et al., 2012 ; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013 ;Ngo et al., 2017 ) (Figure 3figure supplement 1 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Instead, as a firstFigure 2 continued conformational change upon activation. ( c) Two types of conformational changes (i.e. switching and repacking contacts) can be defined by RRCS to quantify the global, local, major and subtle conformational changes in a systematic way. ( d) Two criteria of identifying conserved residue rearrangements upon receptor activation by RRCS and DRRCS. Thirty-four residues pairs were identified based on the criteria (see Materials and methods, Figure 2source datas 1 and2for details), only six of them were discovered before ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ). The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 2: Source data 1. Calculated RRCS of 34 residue pairs constituting the common activation pathway for released class A GPCR structures. Source data 2. Thirty-four residue pairs show conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon activation. Figure supplement 1. Calculation of RRCS and DRRCS. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 6, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 6 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 7, 'content': 'common step, extracellular binding of diverse agonists converges to trigger an identical alteration of the transmission switch (3 /C240, 5/C251, 6/C244 and 6 /C248) and Na+pocket (2 /C250, 3/C239, 7/C245 and 7/C249). Specifically, the repacking of an intra-helical contact between residues at 6 /C248 and 6 /C244, together with the switching contacts of residue at 3 /C240 toward 6 /C248 and residue at 5 /C251 toward 6/C244, contract the TM3-5-6 interface in this layer. This reorganization initializes the rotation of the cytoplasmic end of TM6. The collapse of Na+pocket leads to a denser repacking of the four residues (2/C250, 3/C239, 7/C245 and 7 /C249), initiating the movement of TM7 toward TM3. Remarkably, a recent NMR study on A 2AR (Eddy et al., 2018 ) demonstrated the strong coupling between allosteric switch D2/C250and toggle switch W6/C248, which is consistent with the present observation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Layer 2: In parallel with these movements, two residues (6 /C240 and 6 /C241) switch their contacts with residue at 3 /C243, and form new contacts instead with residues at 5 /C258 and 5 /C255, respectively. Residues at 3 /C243, 6/C240 and 6 /C241 are mainly composed of hydrophobic amino acids and referred as hydrophobic lock ( Wescott et al., 2016 ;Tehan et al., 2014 ;Han et al., 2012 ;Mart - Solano et al., 2014 ). Its opening loosens the packing of TM3-TM6 and facilitates the outward move- ment of the cytoplasmic end of TM6, which is necessary for receptor activation. Additionally, N7/C249 Figure 3. Common activation pathway of class A GPCRs. Node represents structurally equivalent residue with the GPCRdb numbering ( Isberg et al., 2016 ) while the width of edge is proportional to the average DRRCS among six receptors (bRho, b2AR, M2R, mOR, A 2AR and k-OR). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Four layers were qualitatively defined based on the topology of the pathway and their roles in activation: signal initiation (layer 1), signal propagation (layer 2), microswitches rewiring (layer 3) and G-protein coupling (layer 4). The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 3: Figure supplement 1. Rearrangements of ligand-residue contacts in ligand-binding pocket are not conserved, reflecting diverse ligand recognition modes. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 8, 'content': 'develops contacts with residue at 3 /C243 from nothing, facilitating the movement of TM7 toward TM3. Layer 3: Upon receptor activation, Y7/C253loses its inter-helical contacts ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ) with residues at 1 /C253 and 8 /C250, and forms new contacts with residues at 3 /C243, 3/C246 and R3/C250, which were closely packed with residues in TM6. Thus, the switching of contacts by Y7/C253 strengthens the packing of TM3-TM7, while the packing of TM3-TM6 is further loosened with the outward movement of TM6. Layer 4: Finally, the restrains on R3/C250, including more conserved, local intra-helical contacts with D(E)3/C249and less conserved ionic lock with D(E)6/C230, are eliminated and R3/C250is released. Notably, the switching contacts between R3/C250and residue at 6 /C237 are essential for the release of R3/C250, which breaks the remaining contacts between TM3 and TM6 in the cytoplasmic end and drives the outward movement of TM6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The rewired contacts of R3/C250and other G-protein contacting positions (3/C253, 3/C254, 5/C261 and 6 /C233) make the receptor competent to bind to G protein on the cytosolic side. Together, these findings demonstrate that the intra-helical/inter-helical and switching/repacking contacts between residues is not only critical to reveal the continuous and modular nature of the activation pathway, but also to link residue-level changes to transmembrane helix-level changes in the receptor. Figure 4. The common activation mechanism is the shared portion of various downstream pathways of different class A GPCRs. ( a) Intracellular binding partners used in the active state structures. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 8, 'content': '( b) Comparison of RRCS for active (green) and inactive (orange) states of eight receptors with different intracellular binding partners, including four recently solved cryo-EM structures of G i/o-bound receptors (5-HT 1Breceptor, rhodopsin, A 1R and mOR) (Tsai et al., 2018 ;Garc a-Nafr a et al., 2018 ;Kang et al., 2018 ;Koehl et al., 2018 ;Draper-Joyce et al., 2018 ) whose resolutions were low (usually /C213.8 Afor the GPCR part). Nevertheless, almost all conserved residue rearrangements in the pathway can be observed from them. Three of 34 residues pairs were shown here, see Figure 4figure supplements 1 and2for the remaining 31 residue pairs. The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 4: Figure supplement 1. The switching conformation change is conserved upon receptor activation. Figure supplement 2. The repacking conformation change is conserved upon receptor activation. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Common activation pathway induced changes in TM helix packing To capture the patterns in the global movements of transmembrane helices, all inter-helical residues pairs in the common activation pathway were used to describe the inter-helical contacts between the cytoplasmic end of TM3 and TM6 as well as TM3 and TM7 ( Figure 5a ). Analysis of the RRCS TM3- TM7(X-axis) and RRCS TM3-TM6 (Y-axis) for each of the 234 class A GPCR structures revealed distinct compact clusters of inactive and active states. Surprisingly, the inactive state has zero or close to zero RRCS TM3-TM7 regardless of the wide distribution of RRCS TM3-TM6 . In contrast, the active state has a high RRCS TM3-TM7 and strictly zero RRCS TM3-TM6 . Thus, receptor activation from inactive to active state occurs as a harmonious process of inter-helical contact changes: elimination of TM3-TM6 contacts, formation of TM3-TM7 contacts and repacking of TM5-TM6 ( Figure 5b andFigure 5fig- ure supplement 1 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 9, 'content': 'In terms of global conformational changes, the binding of diverse agonists con- verges to trigger outward movement of the cytoplasmic end of TM6 and inward movement of TM7 toward TM3 ( Rasmussen et al., 2011a ;Nygaard et al., 2009 ;Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ), thereby creating an intracellular crevice for G protein coupling ( Figure 5b ). It is noteworthy that the common activation pathway we discovered in this study is not the only pathway that connecting extracellular ligand-binding and intracellular effector coupling for class A GPCRs - -it is likely to be a shared portion of various activation pathways of GPCR members belong- ing to this class - -each receptor still has its unique receptor-, ligand- and effector-specific activation pathways. In fact, research on this subject has boosted the discovery of selective and biased ligands (McCorvy et al., 2018 ;Onaran et al., 2014 ;Schmid et al., 2017 ;Smith et al., 2018 ;Tan et al., 2018 ;Whalen et al., 2011 ;Wootten et al., 2018 ;Wootten et al., 2016 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 9, 'content': 'As shown in Figure 5figure supplement 2 , collapse of the Na+pocket leads to a denser repacking of six residues (five residue pairs), reflected by higher RRCS sodium_pocket scores in active state than that in inactive state structures. Recently, the crystal structures (5X33 [ Hori et al., 2018 ], 6BQG [ Peng et al., 2018 ] and 6K1Q [ Nagiri et al., 2019 ]) whose ligand (inverse agonist) diffuses deep in ligand-binding pocket or even occupies the sodium binding pocket (below D2/C250) were reported. These inverse agonists disrupt the collapse of Na+pocket by blocking the rotation of W6/C248and/or taking the space of Na+, and stabilize the receptors in an inactive state. Indeed, these inactive state structures showed zero RRCS TM3-TM7 but high RRCS TM3-TM6 scores. The inverse ago- nism are not only consistent with both our activation model and mutagenesis experiments, but also supported by the NMR study of A 2AR (Eddy et al., 2018 ). This study demonstrated the role of Figure 5. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Common activation model of class A GPCRs reveals major changes upon GPCR activation. ( a) Active and inactive state structures form compact clusters in the 2D inter-helical contact space: RRCS TM3-TM7 (X-axis) and RRCS TM3-TM6 (Y-axis). GPCR activation is best described by the outward movement of TM6 and inward movement of TM7, resulting in switch in the contacts of TM3 from TM6 to TM7. ( b) Common activation model for class A GPCRs. Residues are shown in circles, conserved contact rearrangements of residue pairs upon activation are denoted by lines. The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5: Figure supplement 1. Global conformational change upon activation. Figure supplement 2. An inverse-agonism of class A GPCRs by preventing the collapse of Na+pocket. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': 'D522/C250as an allosteric link between the orthosteric ligand-binding site and the intracellular signal- ing surface, revealing strong interactions with the toggle switch W2466/C248. Experimental validation of the modular nature of the common activation pathway Based on the knowledge of the common activation pathway, one would expect that mutations of residues in the pathway are likely to severely affect receptor activation. The two extreme consequen- ces are constitutive activation (without agonist binding) or inactivation (abolished signalling). To experimentally test this hypothesis, we systematically designed site-directed mutagenesis for resi- dues in the pathway on a prototypical receptor A 2AR, aiming to create constitutively activating/inac- tivating mutations (CAM/CIM), by promoting/blocking residue and helix level conformational changes revealed in the pathway. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': '6/15 designed CAMs and 15/20 designed CIMs were validated by functional cAMP accumulation assays, and none of them were reported before for A 2AR (Figure 6 , Figure 6figure supplement 1 andFigure 6source data 1 ). The design of functional active/inac- tive mutants has been very challenging. However, the knowledge of common activation pathway of GPCRs presented here greatly improves the success rate. The mechanistic interpretation of 21 suc- cessful predicted mutants is explained below. We also discussed the 14 unsuccessful predictions in Figure 6source data 2 . Besides, we extended mutagenesis studies to G s-coupled 5-HT 7and G i- coupled 5-HT 1Breceptors by designing CAM/CIMs in residues at 3 /C240, 3/C243, 6/C240, 6/C244, and 7/C249 (Figure 6figure supplement 2 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': 'In layer 1, the mutation I923/C240N likely stabilizes the active state by forming amide- pinteractions with W2466/C248and hydrogen bond with the backbone of C1855/C2461, which rewires the packing at the transmission switch and initiates the outward movement of the cytoplasmic end of TM6; this mutation elevated the basal cAMP level by sevenfold. Conversely, I923/C240A would reduce the favor- able contacts with W6/C248upon activation, which retards the initiation of the outward movement of TM6; this mutation resulted in a decrease in both basal cAMP level [71% of wild-type (WT)] and ago- nist potency (eightfold). Another example is the residue at 6 /C244, the mutation F2426/C244R would sta- bilize the inactive state by forming salt bridge with D522/C250, which blocks the rotation of TM6 and thus abolishes G scoupling; indeed this mutation greatly reduced basal cAMP level (to 63% WT) and agonist potency (by 374-fold). In contrast, F2426/C244A would reduce contacts with W2466/C248, loosen TM3-TM6 contacts, diminish the energy barrier of TM6 release and make outward movement of TM6 easier; consistently this mutation elevated the basal cAMP level (by twofold) and increased the agonist potency (by eightfold). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Mutations of residues forming the Na+pocket, such as D522/C250A and N2807/C245R, would destroy the hydrogen bond network at the Na+pocket and retard the initiation of the inward movement of TM7. These mutations completely abolished agonist potency and greatly reduced the basal cAMP level (to 80% and 78% of WT, respectively). In layer 2, the mutations L953/C243A/R and I2386/C240Y would loosen the hydrophobic lock, weaken TM3-TM6 contacts, promote the outward movement of cytoplasmic end of TM6 and eventually make receptor constitutively active; this is reflected by remarkably high basal cAMP production (28-, 2- and 11-fold increase, respectively). Notably, mutations at/near the Na+pocket, L482/C246R and N2847/C249K, could lock the Na+pocket at inactive packing mode by introducing salt bridge with D522/C250, thus blocking the inward movement of TM7 toward TM3. As expected, these mutations completely abolished agonist potency. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': 'The CIMs at/near the Na+pocket (from both layers 1 and 2) reflect that the subtle inward movement of TM7 towards TM3 is essential for receptor activation, which is often underappreciated and overshadowed by the movement of TM6. In line with this, two mutations on TM7, N2847/C249A and Y2887/C253A, attenuate the TM3-TM7 contacts upon activation and completely abolished or greatly reduced (by 16-fold) agonist potency, respectively. In layer 3, I983/C246A likely reduces contacts with Y2887/C253, weakens the packing between TM3- TM7, and retards the movement of TM7 toward TM3; similarly, L2356/C237A would reduce contacts with F2015/C262, weaken the packing between TM5-TM6, and makes the TM6 movement toward TM5 more difficult. In line with the interpretation, these mutations resulted in reduced basal cAMP level (72% and 71% WT, respectively) and decreased agonist potency (23- and 4-fold, respectively). These results are consistent with previous findings on vasopressin type-2 receptor (V2R) (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ). Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 10, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 10 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Figure 6. Experimental validation of the common activation mechanism. ( a) cAMP accumulation assay and ( b) radioligand binding assay: both validated the common activation pathway-guided design of CAMs/CIMs for A 2AR. Wildtype (WT), CAMs and CIMs are shown in black, green and orange, respectively. ( c) Mechanistic interpretation of common activation pathway-guided CAMs/CIMs design. N.D.: basal activity was too high to determine an accurate EC 50value. The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 6: Source data 1. Functional and ligand binding properties of A 2AR mutations. Source data 2. Analysis of the 14 unsuccessful predictions of A 2AR CAMs/CIMs. Figure supplement 1. Experimental validation of common activation pathway-guided CAM/CIM design for A 2A R. Figure supplement 2. Experimental validation of common activation pathway-guided CAM/CIM design for G s-coupled 5-HT 7and G i-coupled 5-HT 1B receptors. Zhou et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 11, 'content': 'eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'In layer 4, D1013/C249N likely diminishes its intra-helical interaction with R1023/C250and thus makes the release of the latter easier, which in turn promotes G-protein recruitment. Consistent with this possibility, this mutation led to a greatly elevated basal cAMP level (eightfold). Despite these A 2AR mutants greatly affect receptor activation, our radioligand binding assay shows that they generally retain the agonist binding ability, with the exception of two CIMs: W2466/C248A and N2847/C245K (Figure 6b,c andFigure 6source data 1 ). This suggests that the com- mon activation pathway is of modular nature and that such an organization allows for a significant number of residues involved in agonist binding to be uncoupled from receptor activation/inactiva- tion and G-protein binding. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'As shown in Figure 6figure supplements 2 and 5-HT 7receptor mutations F3366/C244R and N3807/C249K completely abolished agonist potency and greatly reduced the basal cAMP level, which is remarkably consistent with the observation on A 2AR, highlighting the crucial role of the highly con- served residues F6/C244and N7/C249. Beyond G s-coupled A 2AR and 5-HT 7receptor, we also validated this mutation design in G i-coupled 5-HT 1Breceptor. Indeed, two CIMs, I1373/C240N and F3236/C244H greatly reduced receptor-mediated G iactivity compared to WT, whereas three CAMs, L1733/C243A in Gs-coupled 5-HT 7receptor, F3236/C244A and I1373/C240A in G i-coupled 5-HT 1Breceptor, were verified to promote their basal activities, consistent with the observation on CAMs (L953/C243A, F2426/C244A and I923/C240A) designed for A 2AR. The common pathway allows mechanistic interpretation of mutations Four hundred thirty five disease-associated mutations were collected, among which 28% can be mapped to the common activation pathway, much higher than that to the ligand-binding and G-pro- tein-binding regions (20% and 7%, respectively) ( Figure 7a,b ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Furthermore, 272 CAMs/CIMs from 41 receptors ( Figure 7c ) were mined from the literature for the 14 hub residues (i.e. residues that have more than one edges in the pathway). The average number of disease-associated mutations in the common activation pathway is much higher than that of ligand-binding pocket, G-protein-binding site, and residues in other regions (2.5- , 3.5- and 3.5-fold, respectively), reflecting the enrichment of disease-associated mutations on the pathway ( Figure 7a ). Within this pathway, the enrichment of disease mutations and CAMs/CIMs in layers 1 and 2 is noteworthy, which highlights the importance of signal initiation and hydrophobic lock opening, and further supports the modular and hierarchical nature of GPCR activation ( Figures 3 and5b). Notably, for certain residues, such as D2/C250and Y7/C253, only loss-of-function disease muta- tions or CIMs were observed ( Figure 7 ), implying they are indispensable for receptor activation and the essential role of TM7 movement ( Figures 3 and5). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'The functional consequence of these single point mutations can be rationalized by analysing if they are stabilizing/destabilizing the contacts in the common activation pathway or promoting/ retarding the required helix movement upon activation ( Figure 7b andFigure 7figure supple- ment 1 ). For example, I1303/C243N/F (layer 2) in V2R was reported as a gain-/loss-of-function mutation that causes nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis ( Erdelyi et al., 2015 ) or nephro- genic diabetes insipidus ( Pasel, 2000 ), respectively. I1303/C243N/F likely loosens/stabilizes the hydro- phobic lock, weakens/strengthens the TM3-TM6 packing and leads to constitutively active/inactive receptors. Another example is T581/C253M in rhodopsin, which was reported as a loss-of-function mutation that causes retinitis pigmentosa 4 ( Napier et al., 2015 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'T581/C253M likely increases hydro- phobic contacts with Y3067/C253and P3037/C250, which retards the inward movement of TM7 towards TM3 and eventually decreases G-protein recruitment. As in the case of disease-associated mutations, CAMs/CIMs that have been previously reported in the literature can also be interpreted by the framework of common activation pathway ( Figure 7figure supplement 1b ). For example, F2486/C244Y in CXCR4 ( Wescott et al., 2016 ) was reported as a CIM. This residue likely forms hydro- gen bond with S1233/C239, which blocks the rotation of the cytoplasmic end of TM6, and decreases G-protein engagement. Not surprisingly, the 35 residues constituting the pathway are highly conserved across class A GPCRs, dominated by physiochemically similar amino acids ( Figure 7figure supplement 2 ). The average sequence similarity of these positions across 286 non-olfactory class A receptors is 66.2%, significantly higher than that of ligand-binding pockets (31.9%) or signaling protein-coupling regions (35.1%). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Together, these observations suggest that the modular and hierarchical nature of the activa- tion pathway allows decoupling of the ligand-binding pocket, G-protein-binding site and the Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Figure 7. Importance of the common activation pathway in pathophysiological and biological contexts. ( a) Comparison of disease-associated mutations in the common activation pathway (further decomposed into layers 14), ligand-binding pocket, G-protein-coupling region and other regions. Red line denotes the mean value. ( b) Mapping of disease-associated mutations in class A GPCRs to the common activation pathway. ( c) Key roles of the residues Figure 7 continued on next page Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 14, 'content': 'residues contributing to the common activation mechanism. Such an organization of the receptor might facilitate the uneven sequence conservation between different regions of GPCRs, confers their functional diversity in ligand recognition and G-protein binding while still retaining a common activa- tion mechanism. Discussion Using a novel, quantitative residue contact descriptor, RRCS, and a family-wide comparison across 234 structures from 45 class A GPCRs, we reveal a common activation pathway that directly links ligand-binding pocket and G-protein-coupling region. Key residues that connect the different mod- ules allows for the decoupling of a large number of residues in the ligand-binding site, G-protein contacting region and residues involved in the activation pathway. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Such an organization may have facilitated the rapid expansion of GPCRs through duplication and divergence, allowing them to evolve independently and bind to diverse ligands due to removal of the constraint ( i.e., between a large number of ligand-binding residues and those involved in receptor activation). This model uni- fies many previous important motifs and observations on GPCR activation in the literature (CWxP, PIF, Na+pocket, NPxxY, DRY and hydrophobic lock) and is consistent with numerous experimental findings. We focused on the common activation pathway (i.e. the common part of activation mechanism shared by all class A GPCRs and various intracellular effectors) in this study. Obviously, individual class A receptor naturally has its intrinsic activation mechanism(s), as a result of the diversified sequences, ligands and physiological functions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Indeed, receptor-specific activation pathways (including mechanisms of orthosteric, positive or negative allosteric modulators, biased signaling/ selectivity of downstream effectors) have been revealed by both experimental studies including bio- physical (such as X-ray, cryo-EM, NMR, FRET/BRET and DEER), biochemical and computational approaches (such as evolutionary trace analysis and molecular dynamics simulations), especially for the prototypical receptors such as rhodopsin, b2-adrenergic and A 2Areceptors. These studies dem- onstrated the complexity and plasticity of signal transduction of GPCRs. The computational frame- work we have developed may assist us in better understanding the mechanism of allosteric modulation, G-protein selectivity and diverse activation processes via intermediate states as more GPCR structures become available. While we interpret the changes as a linear set of events, future studies aiming at understanding dynamics could provide further insights into how the common acti- vation mechanism operates in individual receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Given the common nature of this pathway, we envision that the knowledge obtained from this study can not only be used to mechanistically interpret the effect of mutations in biological and pathophysiological context but also to rationally introduce mutations in other receptors by promot- ing/blocking residue and helix level movements that are essential for activation. Such protein engi- neering approaches may enable us to make receptors in specific conformational states to accelerate structure determination studies using X-ray crystallography or electron microscopy and functional investigation in the future. The method developed here could also be readily adapted to map allo- steric pathways and reveal mechanisms of action for other key biological systems such as kinases, ion channels and transcription factors.Figure 7 continued constituting the common activation pathway have been reported in numerous experimental studies on class A GPCRs. Two hundred seventy two (272) CAMs/CIMs from 41 receptors were mined from the literature for the 14 hub residues (i.e. residues that have more than one edges in the pathway). The online version of this article includes the following source data and figure supplement(s) for figure 7: Source data 1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Constitutively activating/inactivating mutations for the 14 hub residues in the common activation pathway. Figure supplement 1. The common activation pathway can be used to mechanistically interpret disease-associated mutations and CAMs/CIMs. Figure supplement 2. Residues in the common activation pathway are more conserved than other functional regions of GPCR. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Materials and methods Glossary Transmembrane domains (TMD): the core domain exists in all GPCRs, and consists of seven-trans- membrane helices (TM17) that are linked by three extracellular loops (ECL1-3) and three intracellu- lar loops (ICL1-3). GPCRdb numbering scheme: a structure-based numbering system for GPCRs ( Isberg et al., 2016 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ), an improved version of sequence-based BallesterosWeinstein number- ing (Ballesteros and Weinstein, 1995 ) that considers structural distortions such as helical bulges or constrictions. The most conserved residue in a helix n is designated n /C250, while other residues on the helix are numbered relative to this position. Node: a point in a network at which lines intersect, branch or terminate. In this case, nodes repre- sent amino acid residues. Edge: a connection between the nodes in a network. In this case, an edge represents a residue- residue contact. Hub: a node with two or more edges in a network. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Constitutively activating mutation (CAM): a mutant that could increase the inherent basal activity of the receptor by activating the G-protein-signaling cascade in the absence of agonist. Constitutively inactivating mutation (CIM): a mutant completely abolishes receptor signalling. GPCR structure data set As of October 1, 2018, there are 234 released structures of 45 class A GPCRs with resolution better than 3.8 A (Figure 1source data 1 ), which covers 71% (203 out of 286 receptors, including 158 receptors that have no structures but share >50% sequence similarity in the TMD with the 45 struc- ture-determined receptors) of class A GPCRs ( Figure 1a ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Based on the type of bound ligand and effector, these structures could be classified into three states: inactive state (antagonist or inverse agonist-bound, 142 structures from 38 receptors), active state (both agonist- and G protein/G pro- tein mimetic-bound, 27 structures from eight receptors) and intermediate state (only agonist-bound, 65 structures from 15 receptors). In this study, we primarily focused on conformational comparison between inactive- and active- state structures, while also investigating the intermediate state struc- tures. In the structure data set, seven receptors have both inactive and active structures: rhodopsin (bRho), b2-adrenergic receptor ( b2AR), M2 muscarinic receptor (M2R), m-opioid receptor ( mOR), adenosine A 2Areceptor (A 2AR),k-opioid receptor ( k-OR) and adenosine A 1Areceptor (A 1AR), the active state structure of which was recently determined by cryo-EM. In addition, 32 receptors have either inactive or active structures ( Figure 1source data 1 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Calculation of residue-residue contact score (RRCS) We developed a much finer distance-based method (than coarse-grained Boolean descriptors such as contact map and residues contact [ Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ;Kayikci et al., 2018 ; Eldridge et al., 1997 ;Verdonk et al., 2003 ;Wang et al., 2017 ;Adhikari and Cheng, 2016 ]), namely residue-residue contact score (RRCS). For a pair of residues, RRCS is calculated by summing up a plateau-linear-plateau form atomic contact score adopted from GPCRCoINPocket ( Ngo et al., 2017 ;Kufareva et al., 2011 ;Kufareva and Abagyan, 2012 ;Kufareva et al., 2014a ; Kufareva et al., 2013 ;Kufareva et al., 2014b ;Marsden and Abagyan, 2004 ) for each possible inter-residue heavy atom pairs ( Figure 2figure supplement 1a ). GPCRCoINPocket is a modified version of the hydrophobic term of ChemScore ( Eldridge et al., 1997 ;Verdonk et al., 2003 ) that has been successfully used to describe hydrophobic contribution to binding free energy between ligand and protein. RRCS can describe the strength of residue-residue contact quantitatively in a much more accurate manner than Boolean descriptors ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ;Flock et al., 2017 ). For example, Boolean descriptors do not capture side chain repacking if the backbone atoms of the two residues are close to each other (e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 15, 'content': 'translocation of Y7/C253away from residue at 2 /C243 upon GPCR activation) and local contacts involving adjacent residues (residues within four/six amino acids in protein sequence) (e.g., disengagement between D/E3/C249and R3/C250), while both cases can be well reflected by the change of RRCS ( Figure 2c andFigure 2figure supplement 1b ). Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'All RRCS data can be found in Figure 2source data 1 . The computational details are described as below: 1. For the residue pairs between adjacent residues that are within four amino acids in protein sequence, only side chain heavy atom pairs were considered, atom pairs involving in backbone atoms (C a, C, O, N) were excluded, since the latter seldom change during GPCR activation. For other residue pairs, all possible heavy atom pairs (including backbone atoms) were included when calculating RRCS. 2. Atomic contact scores are solely based on interatomic distance, and they are treated equally without weighting factors such as atom type or contact orientation. In principle, weighting of atomic contact by atom type and/or orientation would improve residue-residue contact score. However, parameterization of atom type or contact orientation is relatively arbitrary, subjective and complicated, especially considering the lipid bilayer environment surrounding GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Our preliminary study for 12 structures from six receptors (bRho, b2AR, M2R, mOR, A 2AR and k-OR) revealed that amino acids with hydrophobic side chains (one-letter code: A, V, I, L, M, P, F, Y, W) contribute to the majority ( ~88%) of residue pairs. Meanwhile, ionic lock opening of well- known motif DRY upon receptor activation can be adequately reflected by RRCS change between D/E3/C249and R3/C250. These results suggest that interatomic distance-dependent resi- due pair contact score may represent an acceptable approximation of actual (either hydropho- bic or charge-charge) interaction energies ( Ngo et al., 2017 ) and is accurate enough for identifying conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon receptor activation. 3. The quality of structures is extremely important for RRCS calculation. We adopted two criteria to exclude unreliable structures and residues: (a) crystal structures whose resolution is /C213.8 A . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Structures in this category are: 5DGY (7.70 A ), 2I37 (4.20 A ), 2I36 (4.10 A ), 5TE5 (4.00 A ), 4GBR (4.00 A ), 5NJ6 (4.00 A ), 5V54 (3.90 A ), 2I35 (3.80 A ), 5D5B (3.80 A ), 4XT3 (3.80 A ); (b) residues whose residue-based real-space R-value (RSR [ Jones et al., 1991 ]) is greater than 0.35. RSR is measure of how well observed and calculated electron densities agree for a resi- due. RSR ranges from 0 (perfect match) to 1 (no match); RSR greater than 0.4 indicates a poor fit (Smart et al., 2018 ). Here we adopted a stricter cut-off, 0.35. Among the 234 class A GPCR structures, 156 have available RSR information ( Kleywegt et al., 2004 ) (http://eds.bmc.uu.se ), with 8.8% residues have RSR >0.35 and they are omitted in our analysis. For the 35 residues that constitute the common activation pathway, 255 out of 5460 RSR data points ( ~4.7%, lower than 8.8% for all residues) were omitted for having RSR values > 0.35. 4. For structures with multiple chains, RRCS were the average over all chains. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'For residues with multiple alternative conformations, RRCS was the sum of individual values multiplied by the weighting factor: occupancy value extracted from PDB files. Small molecule/peptide ligand, or intracellular binding partner (G protein or its mimetic) was treated as a single residue. 5. For the family-wide comparison of conformational changes upon activation, structurally equiva- lent residues are numbered by GPCRdb numbering scheme ( Isberg et al., 2016 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ). Of the 35 residues in the common activation pathway, their GPCRdb numbering in all structures is almost identical to the BallesterosWeinstein numbering ( Ballesteros and Wein- stein, 1995 ), the exceptions are residues at 6 /C237, 6/C241 and 6 /C244 for five receptors: FFAR1, P2Y 1, P2Y 12, F2R and PAR2, which are all from the delta branch of class A family. Identification of conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon activation Using RRCS, structural information of TMD and helix eight in each structure can be decomposed into 400 ~500 residue pairs with positive RRCS. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'DRRCS, defined as RRCS active/C0RRCS inactive , reflects the change of RRCS for a residue pair from inactive- to active- state ( Figure 2bd andFigure 2fig- ure supplement 1b ). To identify residue pairs with conserved conformational rearrangements upon activation across class A GPCRs, two rounds of selections ( Figure 2d andFigure 2source data 1 ) were performed: (i) identification of conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon activation for six receptors (bRho, b2AR, M2R, mOR, A 2AR and k-OR), that is equivalent residue pairs show a similar and substantial change in RRCS between the active and inactive state structure of each of the six receptors (the same sign of DRRCS and | DRRCS| > 0.2 for all receptors) and (ii) family-wide RRCS comparison between the 142 inactive and 27 active state structures to identify residues pairs of sta- tistically significant different (p<0.001; two sample t-test) RRCS upon activation. Round 1. Identification of conserved rearrangements of residue contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Six receptors with avail- able inactive- and active- state structures were analyzed using DRRCS to identify residue pairs that Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'share similar conformational changes. Twelve representative crystal structures (high-resolution, no mutation or one mutation in TMD without affecting receptor signalling) were chosen in this stage: six inactive state structures (PDB codes 1GZM for bRho, 2RH1 for b2AR, 3UON for M2R, 4DKL for mOR, 3EML for A 2AR and 4DJH for k-OR) and six active state structures (3PQR for bRho, 3SN6 for b2AR, 4MQS for M2R, 5C1M for mOR, 5G53 for A 2AR and 6B73 for k-OR) ( Figure 2d ,Figure 2fig- ure supplement 1c andFigure 2source data 1 ). Each receptor has approximately 600 residues pairs that have positive RRCS. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Roughly one quarter are newly formed during receptor activation (RRCS inactive = 0 and RRCS active >0); another quarter lose their contacts upon receptor activation (RRCS inactive >0 and RRCS active = 0); and the remaining appear in both the inactive- or active- state structures (RRCS inactive >0 and RRCS active >0), the contact rearrangement of which can only be reflected by DRRCS, but not Boolean descriptors. To identify residue pairs that share conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon activa- tion, two steps are performed to qualify residue pairs for the next round. Firstly, residue pairs with same sign of DRRCS and | DRRCS| > 0.2 for all six receptors were identified. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'There are 32 intra-recep- tor residues pairs (1 /C249:7/C250, 1/C253:7/C253, 1/C253:7/C254, 2/C237:2/C240, 2/C242:4/C245, 2/C243:7/C253, 2/C245:4/C250, 2 /C246:2/C250, 2 /C250:3/C239, 2 /C257:7/C242, 3 /C240:6/C248, 3 /C243:6/C240, 3 /C243:6/C241, 3/C243:7/C249, 3/C243:7/C253, 3/C246:6/C237, 3/C246:7/C253, 3/C249:3/C250, 3/C250:3/C253, 3/C250:6/C237, 350:7 /C253, 3/C251:5/C257, 5 /C251:6/C244, 5 /C258:6/C240, 5 /C262:6/C237, 6 /C240:7/C249, 6 /C244:6/C248, 7 /C250:7/C255, 7/C252:7/C253, 7/C253:8/C250, 7/C254:8/C250 and 7 /C254:8/C251) and five receptor-G protein/its mimetic resi- due pairs (3 /C250:G protein, 3 /C253:G protein, 3 /C254:G protein, 5 /C261:G protein and 6 /C233:G protein) that meet this criterion. Secondly, we also investigated residue pairs with DRRCS that are conserved in five receptors ( i.e., with one receptor as exception). Considering there is no Na+pocket for rho- dopsin, three residue pairs (2 /C250:7/C249, 6/C244:7/C245 and 6 /C248:7/C245) around Na+pocket were ana- lyzed for five receptors but not bRho. Additionally, three residue pairs have 0 (3 /C246:3/C250, 5/C255:6/C241) or negative (7 /C245:7/C249)DRRCS for k-OR but positive DRRCS for the other five recep- tors. As for 3 /C246:3/C250, nanobody-stabilized active structures ( b2AR: 3P0G, 4LDO, 4LDL, 4LDE, 4QKX; and mOR: 5C1M) generally have lower contact scores (<0.4) compared with G-protein-bound active-state structures (2.17 for 3SN6 of b2AR, 2.57 for 5G53 of A 2AR and 6.93 for 3PQR of bRho). For these residue pairs, we added newly determined G i-bound active A 1AR and 5-HT 1Breceptor and found that they have positive DRRCS, like other five receptors ( Figure 4figure supplements 1 and 2). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Thus, these three residue pairs (3 /C246:3/C250, 5/C255:6/C241 and 7 /C245:7/C249) were retained. Totally, six residue pairs with conserved DRRCS in five receptors were rescued. Taken together, 38 intra- receptor residue pairs and five receptor-G protein/its mimetic residue pairs were identified to have conserved rearrangements of residue contacts upon activation. Round 2. Family-wide conservation analysis of residue contact pattern. To investigate the conser- vation of residue contact pattern for the 38 intra-receptor residue pairs across these functionally diverse receptors, two-tailed unpaired t-test between inactive state (142 inactive structures from 38 receptors) and active state (27 active structures from eight receptors) groups were performed (Figure 2d andFigure 2source data 2 ). Thirty one residue pairs have significantly different RRCS between inactive- and active-state (p<10/C05). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'As rhodopsin lacks the Na+pocket, all rhodopsin struc- tures were neglected in the analysis of 3 residue pairs around the pocket (2 /C250:7/C249, 6/C244:7/C245 and 6/C248:7/C245), which have good p value (<10/C03) for these non-rhodopsin class A GPCRs. Four res- idue pairs were filtered out in this round due to their poor p value, that is there are no statistically significant difference in RRCS between inactive and active states (p=0.01 for 2 /C237:2/C240, 0.96 for 2/C242:4/C245, 0.02 for 2 /C245:4/C250 and 0.014 for 2 /C257:7/C242). Finally, 34 intra-receptor residue pairs ( Figure 2d ,Figure 4figure supplements 1 and2) and five receptor-G-protein residue pairs were identified with conserved rearrangements of residue con- tacts upon activation, including all six residues pairs identified by the previous RC approaches (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ). Sequence analysis of class A GPCRs The alignment of 286 non-olfactory, class A human GPCRs were obtained from the GPCRdb (Isberg et al., 2016 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 17, 'content': 'The distribution of sequence similarity/identity across class A GPCRs were extracted from the sequence similarity/identity matrix for different structural regions using Similarity Matrix tool in GPCRdb. The sequence conservation score ( Figure 1figure supple- ment 1 ) for all residue positions across 286 non-olfactory class A GPCRs were evaluated by the Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Protein Residue Conservation Prediction ( Capra and Singh, 2007 ) tool with scoring method Prop- erty Entropy ( Mirny and Shakhnovich, 1999 ). Sequence conservation analysis ( Figure 7figure supplement 2 ) were visualized by WebLogo3 ( Crooks et al., 2004 ) with sequence alignment files from GPCRdb as the input. CAM/CIM in class A GPCRs For the 14 hub residues in the common activation pathway, we collected the functional mutation data from the literature and GPCRdb ( Isberg et al., 2016 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ). Mutations with more than two fold-increase in basal activity/constitutively active or abolished effect compared to the wild-type receptor were selected. Together, 272 mutations from 41 class A GPCRs on the 14 hub residues were collected, including the mutations we designed and validated in this study ( Fig- ure 7source data 1 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Disease-associated mutations in class A GPCRs To reveal the relationship between disease-associated mutations and related phenotypes of different transmembrane regions ( Vassart and Costagliola, 2011 ;Thompson et al., 2014 ;Tao, 2006 ; Tao, 2008 ), we collected disease-associated mutation information for all 286 non-olfactory class A GPCRs by database integration and literature investigation. Four commonly used databases (UniProt [The UniProt Consortium, 2017 ], OMIM [ Amberger et al., 2011 ], Ensembl [ Zerbino et al., 2018 ] and GPCRdb [ Isberg et al., 2016 ;Isberg et al., 2015 ]) were first filtered by disease mutations and then merged. Totally 435 disease mutations from 61 class A GPCRs were collected ( Figure 1 source data 2 ). Pathway-guided CAM/CIM design in A 2AR We designed mutations for a prototypical receptor A 2AR, guided by the common activation path- way, aiming to get constitutively active/inactive receptor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Mutations that can either stabilize active or inactive state structures of A 2AR or promote/block conformational changes upon activation were designed ( Figure 6c andFigure 6figure supplement 1 ) and tested by a functional cAMP accumu- lation assay. The inactive state structure 3EML and active state structure 5G53 were used. In silico mutagenesis was performed by Residue Scanning module in BioLuminate ( Beard et al., 2013 ). Side- chain prediction with backbone sampling and a cut-off value of 6 A were applied during the scan- ning. DStability is the change of receptor stability when introducing a mutation. We filtered the mutations by one of the following criteria: (i) DStability in active and inactive structures have opposite signs; or (ii) DStability in active and inactive structures have the same sign, but favorable interactions such as hydrogen bonds, salt bridge or pi-pi stacking exist in only one structure that can promote/ block conformational changes upon activation. Totally, 15 and 20 mutations were predicted to be CAMs and CIMs, respectively. ( Figure 6c andFigure 6figure supplement 1 ). cAMP accumulation assays (i)A 2AR. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 18, 'content': 'The desired mutations were introduced into amino-terminally Flag tag-labeled human A 2AR in the pcDNA3.1 vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). This construct displayed equivalent pharmaco- logical features to that of untagged human receptor based on radioligand binding and cAMP assays (Massink et al., 2015 ). The mutants were constructed by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis (Muta-directTM kit, Beijing SBS Genetech Co., Ltd., China). Sequences of receptor clones were con- firmed by DNA sequencing. HEK-293 cells (obtained from ATCC and confirmed as negative for mycoplasma contamination) were seeded onto 6-well cell culture plates. After overnight culture, the cells were transiently transfected with WT or mutant DNA using Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent (Invitrogen). After 24 hr, the transfected cells were seeded onto 384-well plates (3,000 cells per well). cAMP accumulation was measured using the LANCE cAMP kit (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA) according to the manufacturers instructions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Briefly, transfected cells were incubated for 40 min in assay buffer (DMEM, 1 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine) with different concentrations of agonist [CGS21680 (179 pM to 50 mM)]. The reactions were stopped by addition of lysis buffer containing LANCE reagents. Plates were then incubated for 60 min at room temperature and time-resolved FRET signals were measured at 625 nm and 665 nm by an EnVision multilabel plate reader (Perki- nElmer). The cAMP response is depicted relative to the maximal response of CGS21680 (100%) at Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 19, 'content': 'the WT A 2AR. (ii) 5-HT 1Breceptor. cAMP accumulation was measured using LANCE cAMP kit (Perki- nElmer). Briefly, HEK293T (obtained from and certified by the Cell Bank at the Chinese Academy of Science and confirmed as negative for mycoplasma contamination) cells were transfected with plas- mids bearing WT or mutant 5-HT 1Breceptor. Cells were collected 24 hr post-transfection and used to seed white poly-D-lysine coated 384-well plates at a density of 2,000 cells per well. Cells were incubated for a further 24 hr at 37C. Cells were then incubated for 30 min in assay buffer (HBSS, 5 mM HEPES, 0.1% BSA, 0.5 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine) with constant Forsklin (800 nM) and dif- ferent concentrations of dihydroergotamine (DHE, 0.64 pM to 50 nM) at 37C. The reactions were stopped by addition of lysis buffer containing LANCE reagents. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Plates were then incubated for 60 min at room temperature, and time-resolved FRET signals were measured after excitation at 620 nm and 650 nm by EnVision (PerkinElmer). CGS21680 binding assay CGS21680 (a specific adenosine A 2Asubtype receptor agonist) binding was analyzed using plasma membranes prepared from HEK-293 cells transiently expressing WT and mutant A 2ARs. Approxi- mately 1.2 /C2108transfected HEK-293 cells were harvested, suspended in 10 ml ice-cold membrane buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) and centrifuged for 5 min at 700 g. The resulting pellet was resus- pended in ice-cold membrane buffer, homogenized by Dounce Homogenizer (Wheaton, Millville, NJ) and centrifuged for 20 min at 50,000 g. The pellet was resuspended, homogenized, centrifuged again and the precipitate containing the plasma membranes was then suspended in the membrane buffer containing protease inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and stored at /C080C. Protein con- centration was determined using a protein BCA assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Pittsburgh, PA). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 19, 'content': 'For homogeneous binding, cell membrane homogenates (10 mg protein per well) were incubated in membrane binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) with constant con- centration of [3H]-CGS21680 (1 nM, PerkinElmer) and serial dilutions of unlabeled CGS21680 (0.26 nM to 100 mM) at room temperature for 3 hr. Nonspecific binding was determined in the presence of 100 mM CGS21680. Following incubation, the samples were filtered rapidly in vacuum through glass fiber filter plates (PerkinElmer). After soaking and rinsing four times with ice-cold PBS, the fil- ters were dried and counted for radioactivity in a MicroBeta2 scintillation counter (PerkinElmer). Surface expression of A 2ARs HEK293 cells were seeded into six-well plate and incubated overnight. After transient transfection with WT or mutant plasmids for 24 hr, the cells were collected and blocked with 5% BSA in PBS at room temperature for 15 min and incubated with primary anti-Flag antibody (1:100, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 1 hr. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 19, 'content': 'The cells were then washed three times with PBS containing 1% BSA followed by 1 hr incubation with anti-rabbit Alexa-488-conjugated secondary antibody (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) at 4C in the dark. After three washes, the cells were resus- pended in 200 ml of PBS containing 1% BSA for detection in a NovoCyte flow cytometer (ACEA Bio- sciences, San Diego, CA) utilizing laser excitation and emission wavelengths of 488 nm and 519 nm, respectively. For each assay point, approximately 15,000 cellular events were collected, and the total fluorescence intensity of positive expression cell population was calculated. Plasmid constructs of 5-HT 7receptor A plasmid encoding the 5-HT 7receptor was obtained from PRESTO-Tango Kit produced by Addg- ene (Watertown, MA). 5-HT 7coding sequence was amplified and ligated into the pRluc8-N1 vector to produce WT 5-HT 7-Rluc8. Mutant 5-HT 7-Rluc8 receptors were generated from this plasmid using the Quikchange mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 19, 'content': 'A plasmid encoding the Nluc-EPAC-VV cAMP sensor was kindly provided by Kirill Martemyanov (The Scripps Research Insti- tute, Jupiter, FL) and has been described previously. ( Masuho et al., 2015 ) All plasmid constructs were verified by DNA sequencing. Cell transfection HEK293 cells cultured in 6-well plates were transiently transfected with the above plasmids (3.0 mg DNA) in growth medium using linear polyethyleneimine MAX (Polysciences, Warrington, PA) at an N/P ratio of 20 and used for experimentation 1248 hr thereafter. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 20, 'content': 'BRET cAMP and trafficking assays HEK 293 cells transiently transfected with WT or mutant 5-HT 7receptor plasmids plus either the Nluc-EPAC-VV cAMP sensor (at a 15:1 ratio) or Venus-kras (at a 1:8 ratio) ( Tian et al., 2017 ) were incubated for 24 hr. After washing twice with PBS, they were transferred to opaque black 96-well plates. Steady-state BRET measurements were made using a Mithras LB940 photon-counting plate reader (Berthold Technologies GmbH, Bad Wildbad, Germany). Furimazine (NanoGlo; 1:1000, Prom- ega) for cAMP measurement or coelenterazine h (5 mM; Nanolight, Pinetop, AZ) for trafficking assay was added followed by BRET signal detection and calculation at an emission intensity of 520545 nm divided by that of 475495 nm. Data and materials availability The open source code is available at GitHub ( Zhou, 2019 ; copy archived at https://github.com/eli- fesciences-publications/RRCS ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 20, 'content': 'For availability of codes that were developed in-house, please con- tacts the corresponding authors. All data are available in the main text or the source data. Acknowledgements This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China grants 31971178 (SZ), 81872915 (M-WW), 21704064 (QZ), 81573479 (DHY) and 81773792 (DHY), National Key R and D Program of China grants 2016YFC0905900 (SZ) and 2018YFA0507000 (SZ and M-WW), National Mega R and D Program for Drug Discovery grants 2018ZX09711002002005 (DHY) and 2018ZX09735001 (M-WW), Shanghai Science and Technology Development Fund grant 16ZR1407100 (ATD), Novo Nordisk-CAS Research Fund grant NNCAS-20171-CC (DHY), the Medi- cal Research Council MC_U105185859 (MMB), National Institutes of Health Grants GM130142 (NAL) and annual overhead support from ShanghaiTech University and Chinese Academy of Sciences. We thank A Sali, MA Hanson and AJ Venkatakrishnan for valuable discussions, YM Xu for technical assis- tance, and AP IJzerman for providing the WT A 2AR plasmid. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Additional information Funding Funder Grant reference number Author Medical Research Council MC_U105185859 M Madan Babu Novo Nordisk-CAS Research NNCAS-2017-1-CC Dehua Yang Young Talent Program of ShanghaiSuwen Zhao Shanghai Science and Tech- nology Development Fund16ZR1448500 Suwen Zhao Shanghai Science and Tech- nology Development Fund16ZR1407100 Antao Dai National Natural Science Foundation of China21704064 Qingtong Zhou National Natural Science Foundation of China81573479 Dehua Yang National Natural Science Foundation of China81773792 Dehua Yang National Natural Science Foundation of China31971178 Suwen Zhao National Mega R&D Program for Drug Discovery2018ZX09735-001 Ming-Wei Wang National Key R&D Program of China2016YFC0905900 Suwen Zhao Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 21, 'content': 'National Mega R&D Program for Drug Discovery2018ZX09711002-002-005 Dehua Yang National Key R&D Program of China2018YFA0507000 Ming-Wei Wang Suwen Zhao National Natural Science Foundation of China81872915 Ming-Wei Wang National Institute of General Medical SciencesGM130142 Nevin A Lambert The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Author contributions Qingtong Zhou, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing; Dehua Yang, Resources, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Vali- dation, Writing - review and editing; Meng Wu, Resources, Data curation; Yu Guo, Software; Wanj- ing Guo, Li Zhong, Xiaoqing Cai, Nevin A Lambert, Data curation, Validation; Antao Dai, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Validation; Wonjo Jang, Validation; Eugene I Shakhnovich, Zhi-Jie Liu, Raymond C Stevens, Provided academic support; M Madan Babu, Conceptualization, Funding acqui- sition, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing; Ming-Wei Wang, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing; Suwen Zhao, Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - original draft, Project adminis- tration, Writing - review and editing Author ORCIDs Qingtong Zhou https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8124-3079 Dehua Yang http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3028-3243 Eugene I Shakhnovich https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4769-2265 Zhi-Jie Liu https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7279-2893 Nevin A Lambert https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7550-0921 Suwen Zhao https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5609-434X Decision letter and Author response Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279.sa1 Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279.sa2 Additional files Supplementary files .Supplementary file ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Author contributions Qingtong Zhou, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing; Dehua Yang, Resources, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Vali- dation, Writing - review and editing; Meng Wu, Resources, Data curation; Yu Guo, Software; Wanj- ing Guo, Li Zhong, Xiaoqing Cai, Nevin A Lambert, Data curation, Validation; Antao Dai, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Validation; Wonjo Jang, Validation; Eug1. Key resource table. .Transparent reporting form Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files. Source data files have been provided for Figures 1, 2, 6 and 7. References Adhikari B , Cheng J. 2016. Protein residue contacts and prediction methods. Methods in Molecular Biology 1415 :463476. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3572-7_24 ,PMID: 27115648 Alhadeff R , Vorobyov I, Yoon HW, Warshel A. 2018. Exploring the free-energy landscape of GPCR activation. PNAS 115:1032710332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1810316115 ,PMID: 30257944 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Allen JA , Roth BL. 2011. Strategies to discover unexpected targets for drugs active at G protein-coupled receptors. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 51:117144. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- pharmtox-010510-100553 ,PMID: 20868273 Amberger J , Bocchini C, Hamosh A. 2011. A new face and new challenges for online mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM). Human Mutation 32:564567. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21466 ,PMID: 21472891 Ballesteros JA , Weinstein H. 1995. [19] Integrated methods for the construction of three-dimensional models and computational probing of structure-function relations in G protein-coupled receptors. Methods in Neurosciences 25:366428. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043-9471(05)80049-7 Beard H , Cholleti A, Pearlman D, Sherman W, Loving KA. 2013. Applying physics-based scoring to calculate free energies of binding for single amino acid mutations in protein-protein complexes. PLOS ONE 8:e82849. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0082849 ,PMID: 24340062 Bhattacharya S , Vaidehi N. 2014. Differences in allosteric communication pipelines in the inactive and active states of a GPCR. Biophysical Journal 107:422434. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2014.06.015 , PMID: 25028884 Bockaert J , Pin JP. 1999. Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: an evolutionary success. The EMBO Journal 18:17231729. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.7.1723 ,PMID: 10202136 Caffrey M , Cherezov V. 2009. Crystallizing membrane proteins using lipidic mesophases. Nature Protocols 4: 706731. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2009.31 ,PMID: 19390528 Capra JA , Singh M. 2007. Predicting functionally important residues from sequence conservation. Bioinformatics 23:18751882. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btm270 ,PMID: 17519246 Carpenter B , Nehme  R, Warne T, Leslie AG, Tate CG. 2016. Structure of the adenosine A(2A) receptor bound to an engineered G protein. Nature 536:104107. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18966 ,PMID: 27462812 Chaturvedi M , Schilling J, Beautrait A, Bouvier M, Benovic JL, Shukla AK. 2018. Emerging paradigm of intracellular targeting of G Protein-Coupled receptors. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 43:533546. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2018.04.003 ,PMID: 29735399 Che T , Majumdar S, Zaidi SA, Ondachi P, McCorvy JD, Wang S, Mosier PD, Uprety R, Vardy E, Krumm BE, Han GW, Lee MY, Pardon E, Steyaert J, Huang XP, Strachan RT, Tribo AR, Pasternak GW, Carroll FI, Stevens RC, et al. 2018. Structure of the Nanobody-Stabilized active state of the kappa opioid receptor. Cell172:5567. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.011 ,PMID: 29307491 Chen S , Lu M, Liu D, Yang L, Yi C, Ma L, Zhang H, Liu Q, Frimurer TM, Wang MW, Schwartz TW, Stevens RC, Wu B, Wu thrich K, Zhao Q. 2019. Human substance P receptor binding mode of the antagonist drug aprepitant by NMR and crystallography. Nature Communications 10:638. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08568-5 , PMID: 30733446 Cheng Y . 2018. Single-particle cryo-EM-How did it get here and where will it go. Science 361:876880. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat4346 ,PMID: 30166484 Cherezov V , Peddi A, Muthusubramaniam L, Zheng YF, Caffrey M. 2004. A robotic system for crystallizing membrane and soluble proteins in lipidic mesophases. Acta Crystallographica Section D Biological Crystallography 60:17951807. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/S0907444904019109 ,PMID: 15388926 Cherezov V , Rosenbaum DM, Hanson MA, Rasmussen SG, Thian FS, Kobilka TS, Choi HJ, Kuhn P, Weis WI, Kobilka BK, Stevens RC. 2007. High-resolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor. Science 318:12581265. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150577 ,PMID: 17 962520 Choe H-W , Kim YJ, Park JH, Morizumi T, Pai EF, Krau N, Hofmann KP, Scheerer P, Ernst OP. 2011. Crystal structure of metarhodopsin II. Nature 471:651655. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09789 Christopoulos A . 2014. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Advances in G protein-coupled receptor allostery: from function to structure. Molecular Pharmacology 86:463478. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.114.094342 ,PMID: 25061106 Christopoulos A , Kenakin T. 2002. G protein-coupled receptor allosterism and complexing. Pharmacological Reviews 54:323374. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.54.2.323 ,PMID: 12037145 Ciancetta A , Sabbadin D, Federico S, Spalluto G, Moro S. 2015. Advances in computational techniques to study GPCR-Ligand recognition. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 36:878890. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips. 2015.08.006 ,PMID: 26538318 Cooke RM , Brown AJH, Marshall FH, Mason JS. 2015. Structures of G protein-coupled receptors reveal new opportunities for drug discovery. Drug Discovery Today 20:13551364. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis. 2015.08.003 Crooks GE , Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE. 2004. WebLogo: a sequence logo generator. Genome Research 14:11881190. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.849004 ,PMID: 15173120 Dalton JA , Lans I, Giraldo J. 2015. Quantifying conformational changes in GPCRs: glimpse of a common functional mechanism. BMC Bioinformatics 16:124. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-015-0567-3 ,PMID: 25 902715 DeVree BT , Mahoney JP, Ve  lez-Ruiz GA, Rasmussen SG, Kuszak AJ, Edwald E, Fung JJ, Manglik A, Masureel M, Du Y, Matt RA, Pardon E, Steyaert J, Kobilka BK, Sunahara RK. 2016. Allosteric coupling from G protein to the agonist-binding pocket in GPCRs. Nature 535:182186. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18324 , PMID: 27362234 Draper-Joyce CJ , Khoshouei M, Thal DM, Liang Y-L, Nguyen ATN, Furness SGB, Venugopal H, Baltos J-A, Plitzko JM, Danev R, Baumeister W, May LT, Wootten D, Sexton PM, Glukhova A, Christopoulos A. 2018. Structure of the adenosine-bound human Adenosine A1 receptorGi complex. Nature 558:559563. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0236-6 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 22, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 22 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Dror RO , Arlow DH, Maragakis P, Mildorf TJ, Pan AC, Xu H, Borhani DW, Shaw DE. 2011a. Activation mechanism of the b2-adrenergic receptor. PNAS 108:1868418689. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1110499108 , PMID: 22031696 Dror RO , Pan AC, Arlow DH, Borhani DW, Maragakis P, Shan Y, Xu H, Shaw DE. 2011b. Pathway and mechanism of drug binding to G-protein-coupled receptors. PNAS 108:1311813123. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1104614108 ,PMID: 21778406 Dror RO , Green HF, Valant C, Borhani DW, Valcourt JR, Pan AC, Arlow DH, Canals M, Lane JR, Rahmani R, Baell JB, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A, Shaw DE. 2013. Structural basis for modulation of a G-protein-coupled receptor by allosteric drugs. Nature 503:295299. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12595 ,PMID: 24121438 Dror RO , Mildorf TJ, Hilger D, Manglik A, Borhani DW, Arlow DH, Philippsen A, Villanueva N, Yang Z, Lerch MT, Hubbell WL, Kobilka BK, Sunahara RK, Shaw DE. 2015. SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Structural basis for nucleotide exchange in heterotrimeric G proteins. Science 348:13611365. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.aaa5264 ,PMID: 26089515 Du Y , Duc NM, Rasmussen SGF, Hilger D, Kubiak X, Wang L, Bohon J, Kim HR, Wegrecki M, Asuru A, Jeong KM, Lee J, Chance MR, Lodowski DT, Kobilka BK, Chung KY. 2019. Assembly of a GPCR-G protein complex. Cell 177:12321242. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.022 ,PMID: 31080064 Eddy MT , Lee M-Y, Gao Z-G, White KL, Didenko T, Horst R, Audet M, Stanczak P, McClary KM, Han GW, Jacobson KA, Stevens RC, Wu thrich K. 2018. Allosteric coupling of drug binding and intracellular signaling in the A2A adenosine receptor. Cell172:6880. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.004 Eldridge MD , Murray CW, Auton TR, Paolini GV, Mee RP. 1997. Empirical scoring functions: I. the development of a fast empirical scoring function to estimate the binding affinity of ligands in receptor complexes. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 11:425445. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1007996124545 ,PMID: 93 85547 Erdelyi LS , Mann WA, Morris-Rosendahl DJ, Gro U, Nagel M, Va  rnai P, Balla A, Hunyady L. 2015. Mutation in the V2 vasopressin receptor gene, AVPR2, causes nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate diuresis. Kidney International 88:10701078. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2015.181 ,PMID: 26131744 Fenalti G , Giguere PM, Katritch V, Huang X-P, Thompson AA, Cherezov V, Roth BL, Stevens RC. 2014. Molecular control of d-opioid receptor signalling. Nature 506:191196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12944 Feng X , Ambia J, Chen KM, Young M, Barth P. 2017. Computational design of ligand-binding membrane receptors with high selectivity. Nature Chemical Biology 13:715723. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio. 2371 ,PMID: 28459439 Filipek S . 2019. Molecular switches in GPCRs. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 55:114120. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2019.03.017 ,PMID: 31082695 Flock T , Ravarani CNJ, Sun D, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Kayikci M, Tate CG, Veprintsev DB, Babu MM. 2015. Universal allosteric mechanism for g aactivation by GPCRs. Nature 524:173179. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature14663 ,PMID: 26147082 Flock T , Hauser AS, Lund N, Gloriam DE, Balaji S, Babu MM. 2017. Selectivity determinants of GPCR-G-protein binding. Nature 545:317322. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22070 ,PMID: 28489817 Fredriksson R , Lagerstro m MC, Lundin LG, Schio th HB. 2003. The G-protein-coupled receptors in the human genome form five main families. Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. Molecular Pharmacology 63:12561272. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.63.6.1256 ,PMID: 12761335 Furness SGB , Liang YL, Nowell CJ, Halls ML, Wookey PJ, Dal Maso E, Inoue A, Christopoulos A, Wootten D, Sexton PM. 2016. Ligand-Dependent modulation of G protein conformation alters drug efficacy. Cell167:739 749. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.021 ,PMID: 27720449 Gainetdinov RR , Premont RT, Bohn LM, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG. 2004. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors and neuronal functions. Annual Review of Neuroscience 27:107144. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/ annurev.neuro.27.070203.144206 ,PMID: 15217328 Garc a-Nafr a J , Nehme  R, Edwards PC, Tate CG. 2018. Cry o-EM structure of the serotonin 5-HT 1Breceptor coupled t oheterotrimeric G o.Nature 558:620623. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0241-9 ,PMID: 2 9925951 Ghosh E , Kumari P, Jaiman D, Shukla AK. 2015. Methodological advances: the unsung heroes of the GPCR structural revolution. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 16:6981. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3933 , PMID: 25589408 Gilchrist A . 2007. Modulating G-protein-coupled receptors: from traditional pharmacology to allosterics. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 28:431437. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2007.06.012 ,PMID: 17644194 Glukhova A , Draper-Joyce CJ, Sunahara RK, Christopoulos A, Wootten D, Sexton PM. 2018. Rules of engagement: gpcrs and G proteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 23, 'content': 'ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science 1:7383. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acsptsci.8b00026 Gregorio GG , Masureel M, Hilger D, Terry DS, Juette M, Zhao H, Zhou Z, Perez-Aguilar JM, Hauge M, Mathiasen S, Javitch JA, Weinstein H, Kobilka BK, Blanchard SC. 2017. Single-molecule analysis of ligand efficacy in b2AR-G-protein activation. Nature 547:6873. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22354 ,PMID: 2 8607487 Haga K , Kruse AC, Asada H, Yurugi-Kobayashi T, Shiroishi M, Zhang C, Weis WI, Okada T, Kobilka BK, Haga T, Kobayashi T. 2012. Structure of the human M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor bound to an antagonist. Nature 482:547551. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10753 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Halls ML , Canals M. 2018. Genetically encoded FRET biosensors to illuminate compartmentalised GPCR signalling. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 39:148157. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2017.09.005 , PMID: 29054309 Han X , Tachado SD, Koziel H, Boisvert WA. 2012. Leu128(3.43) (l128) and Val247(6.40) (V247) of CXCR1 are critical amino acid residues for g protein coupling and receptor activation. PLOS ONE 7:e42765. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0042765 ,PMID: 22936990 Hauser AS , Attwood MM, Rask-Andersen M, Schio th HB, Gloriam DE. 2017. Trends in GPCR drug discovery: new agents, targets and indications. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 16:829842. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1038/nrd.2017.178 ,PMID: 29075003 Hauser AS , Chavali S, Masuho I, Jahn LJ, Martemyanov KA, Gloriam DE, Babu MM. 2018. Pharmacogenomics of GPCR drug targets. Cell172:4154. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.033 ,PMID: 29249361 Hofmann KP , Scheerer P, Hildebrand PW, Choe HW, Park JH, Heck M, Ernst OP. 2009. A G protein-coupled receptor at work: the rhodopsin model. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 34:540552. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tibs.2009.07.005 ,PMID: 19836958 Hollingsworth SA , Kelly B, Valant C, Michaelis JA, Mastromihalis O, Thompson G, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Hertig S, Scammells PJ, Sexton PM, Felder CC, Christopoulos A, Dror RO. 2019. Cryptic pocket formation underlies allosteric modulator selectivity at Muscarinic GPCRs. Nature Communications 10:3289. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-019-11062-7 ,PMID: 31337749 Holst B , Nygaard R, Valentin-Hansen L, Bach A, Engelstoft MS, Petersen PS, Frimurer TM, Schwartz TW. 2010. A conserved aromatic lock for the tryptophan rotameric switch in TM-VI of seven-transmembrane receptors. Journal of Biological Chemistry 285:39733985. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.064725 ,PMID: 1 9920139 Hori T , Okuno T, Hirata K, Yamashita K, Kawano Y, Yamamoto M, Hato M, Nakamura M, Shimizu T, Yokomizo T, Miyano M, Yokoyama S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': '2018. Na+-mimicking ligands stabilize the inactive state of leukotriene B 4receptor BLT1. Nature Chemical Biology 14:262269. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2547 ,PMID: 29309055 Huang W , Manglik A, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Laeremans T, Feinberg EN, Sanborn AL, Kato HE, Livingston KE, Thorsen TS, Kling RC, Granier S, Gmeiner P, Husbands SM, Traynor JR, Weis WI, Steyaert J, Dror RO, Kobilka BK. 2015. Structural insights into m-opioid receptor activation. Nature 524:315321. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1038/nature14886 ,PMID: 26245379 Hulme EC . 2013. GPCR activation: a mutagenic spotlight on crystal structures. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 34:6784. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2012.11.002 ,PMID: 23245528 Hunyady L , Vauquelin G, Vanderheyden P. 2003. Agonist induction and conformational selection during activation of a G-protein-coupled receptor. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 24:8186. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1016/S0165-6147(02)00050-0 ,PMID: 12559772 Ilyaskina OS , Lemoine H, Bu nemann M. 2018. Lifetime of muscarinic receptor-G-protein complexes determines coupling efficiency and G-protein subtype selectivity. PNAS 115:50165021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.1715751115 ,PMID: 29686069 Inoue A , Raimondi F, Kadji FMN, Singh G, Kishi T, Uwamizu A, Ono Y, Shinjo Y, Ishida S, Arang N, Kawakami K, Gutkind JS, Aoki J, Russell RB. 2019. Illuminating G-Protein-Coupling selectivity of GPCRs. Cell177:1933 1947. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.044 Irannejad R , Tomshine JC, Tomshine JR, Chevalier M, Mahoney JP, Steyaert J, Rasmussen SG, Sunahara RK, El- Samad H, Huang B, von Zastrow M. 2013. Conformational biosensors reveal GPCR signalling from endosomes. Nature 495:534538. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12000 ,PMID: 23515162 Isberg V , de Graaf C, Bortolato A, Cherezov V, Katritch V, Marshall FH, Mordalski S, Pin JP, Stevens RC, Vriend G, Gloriam DE. 2015. Generic GPCR residue numbers - aligning topology maps while minding the gaps. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 36:2231. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2014.11.001 ,PMID: 25541108 Isberg V , Mordalski S, Munk C, Rataj K, Harpse K, Hauser AS, Vroling B, Bojarski AJ, Vriend G, Gloriam DE. 2016. GPCRdb: an information system for G protein-coupled receptors. Nucleic Acids Research 44:D356D364. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1178 ,PMID: 26582914 Ishchenko A , Wacker D, Kapoor M, Zhang A, Han GW, Basu S, Patel N, Messerschmidt M, Weierstall U, Liu W, Katritch V, Roth BL, Stevens RC, Cherezov V. 2017. Structural insights into the extracellular recognition of the human serotonin 2B receptor by an antibody. PNAS 114:82238228. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1700891114 ,PMID: 28716900 Isogai S , Deupi X, Opitz C, Heydenreich FM, Tsai CJ, Brueckner F, Schertler GF, Veprintsev DB, Grzesiek S. 2016. Backbone NMR reveals allosteric signal transduction networks in the b1-adrenergic receptor. Nature 530:237 241. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16577 ,PMID: 26840483 Isom DG , Dohlman HG. 2015. Buried ionizable networks are an ancient hallmark of G protein-coupled receptor activation. PNAS 112:57025707. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417888112 ,PMID: 25902551 Jaakola VP , Griffith MT, Hanson MA, Cherezov V, Chien EY, Lane JR, Ijzerman AP, Stevens RC. 2008. The 2.6 angstrom crystal structure of a human A2A adenosine receptor bound to an antagonist. Science 322:1211 1217. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164772 ,PMID: 18832607 Jacobson KA , Costanzi S, Paoletta S. 2014. Computational studies to predict or explain G protein coupled receptor polypharmacology. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 35:658663. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. tips.2014.10.009 ,PMID: 25458540 Jaeger K , Bruenle S, Weinert T, Guba W, Muehle J, Miyazaki T, Weber M, Furrer A, Haenggi N, Tetaz T, Huang CY, Mattle D, Vonach JM, Gast A, Kuglstatter A, Rudolph MG, Nogly P, Benz J, Dawson RJP, Standfuss J. Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 24, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 24 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': '2019. Structural basis for allosteric ligand recognition in the human CC chemokine receptor 7. Cell178:1222 1230. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.028 ,PMID: 31442409 Jones TA , Zou JY, Cowan SW, Kjeldgaard M. 1991. Improved methods for building protein models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallographica Section a Foundations of Crystallography 47:110119. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/S0108767390010224 ,PMID: 2025413 Kang Y , Zhou XE, Gao X, He Y, Liu W, Ishchenko A, Barty A, White TA, Yefanov O, Han GW, Xu Q, de Waal PW, Ke J, Tan MH, Zhang C, Moeller A, West GM, Pascal BD, Van Eps N, Caro LN, et al. 2015. Crystal structure of rhodopsin bound to arrestin by femtosecond X-ray laser. Nature 523:561567. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature14656 ,PMID: 26200343 Kang Y , Kuybeda O, de Waal PW, Mukherjee S, Van Eps N, Dutka P, Zhou XE, Bartesaghi A, Erramilli S, Morizumi T, Gu X, Yin Y, Liu P, Jiang Y, Meng X, Zhao G, Melcher K, Ernst OP, Kossiakoff AA, Subramaniam S, et al. 2018. Cryo-EM structure of human rhodopsin bound to an inhibitory G protein. Nature 558:553558. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0215-y ,PMID: 29899450 Kato HE , Zhang Y, Hu H, Suomivuori CM, Kadji FMN, Aoki J, Krishna Kumar K, Fonseca R, Hilger D, Huang W, Latorraca NR, Inoue A, Dror RO, Kobilka BK, Skiniotis G. 2019. Conformational transitions of a neurotensin receptor 1-G i1complex. Nature 572:8085. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1337-6 ,PMID: 31243364 Katritch V , Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2012. Diversity and modularity of G protein-coupled receptor structures. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 33:1727. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2011.09.003 ,PMID: 22032 986 Katritch V , Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2013. Structure-function of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 53:531556. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pharmtox- 032112-135923 ,PMID: 23140243 Katritch V , Fenalti G, Abola EE, Roth BL, Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2014. Allosteric sodium in class A GPCR signaling. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 39:233244. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2014.03.002 , PMID: 24767681 Kayikci M , Venkatakrishnan AJ, Scott-Brown J, Ravarani CNJ, Flock T, Babu MM. 2018. Visualization and analysis of non-covalent contacts using the protein contacts atlas. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 25:185194. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-017-0019-z ,PMID: 29335563 Kleywegt GJ , Harris MR, Zou JY, Taylor TC, Wa hlby A, Jones TA. 2004. The Uppsala Electron-Density server. Acta Crystallographica Section D Biological Crystallography 60:22402249. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/ S0907444904013253 ,PMID: 15572777 Kobilka B , Schertler GF. 2008. New G-protein-coupled receptor crystal structures: insights and limitations. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 29:7983. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2007.11.009 ,PMID: 1819481 8 Koehl A , Hu H, Maeda S, Zhang Y, Qu Q, Paggi JM, Latorraca NR, Hilger D, Dawson R, Matile H, Schertler GFX, Granier S, Weis WI, Dror RO, Manglik A, Skiniotis G, Kobilka BK. 2018. Structure of the m-opioid receptor-G i protein complex. Nature 558:547552. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0219-7 ,PMID: 29899455 Kohlhoff KJ , Shukla D, Lawrenz M, Bowman GR, Konerding DE, Belov D, Altman RB, Pande VS. 2014. Cloud- based simulations on google exacycle reveal ligand modulation of GPCR activation pathways. Nature Chemistry 6:1521. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.1821 ,PMID: 24345941 Kolakowski LF . 1994. GCRDb: a G-protein-coupled receptor database. Receptors & Channels 2:17. PMID: 80 81729 Komolov KE , Du Y, Duc NM, Betz RM, Rodrigues J, Leib RD, Patra D, Skiniotis G, Adams CM, Dror RO, Chung KY, Kobilka BK, Benovic JL. 2017. Structural and functional analysis of a b2-Adrenergic Receptor Complex with GRK5. Cell169:407421. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.047 ,PMID: 28431242 Kooistra AJ , Vischer HF, McNaught-Flores D, Leurs R, de Esch IJ, de Graaf C. 2016. Function-specific virtual screening for GPCR ligands using a combined scoring method. Scientific Reports 6:28288. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1038/srep28288 ,PMID: 27339552 Krautwurst D , Yau KW, Reed RR. 1998. Identification of ligands for olfactory receptors by functional expression of a receptor library. Cell95:917926. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81716-X ,PMID: 9875846 Kruse AC , Ring AM, Manglik A, Hu J, Hu K, Eitel K, Hu bner H, Pardon E, Valant C, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A, Felder CC, Gmeiner P, Steyaert J, Weis WI, Garcia KC, Wess J, Kobilka BK. 2013. Activation and allosteric modulation of a muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. Nature 504:101106. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature12735 ,PMID: 24256733 Kufareva I , Rueda M, Katritch V, Stevens RC, Abagyan R, GPCR Dock 2010 participants. 2011. Status of GPCR modeling and docking as reflected by community-wide GPCR dock 2010 assessment. Structure 19:11081126. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2011.05.012 ,PMID: 21827947 Kufareva I , Stephens B, Gilliland CT, Wu B, Fenalti G, Hamel D, Stevens RC, Abagyan R, Handel TM. 2013. A novel approach to quantify G-protein-coupled receptor dimerization equilibrium using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer. Methods in Molecular Biology 1013 :93127. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1- 62703-426-5_7 ,PMID: 23625495 Kufareva I , Katritch V, Stevens RC, Abagyan R, Participants of GPCR Dock 2013. 2014a. Advances in GPCR modeling evaluated by the GPCR dock 2013 assessment: meeting new challenges. Structure 22:11201139. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2014.06.012 ,PMID: 25066135 Kufareva I , Stephens BS, Holden LG, Qin L, Zhao C, Kawamura T, Abagyan R, Handel TM. 2014b. Stoichiometry and geometry of the CXC chemokine receptor 4 complex with CXC ligand 12: Molecular modeling and Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 25, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 25 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': 'experimental validation. PNAS 111:E5363E5372. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417037111 ,PMID: 2546 8967 Kufareva I , Abagyan R. 2012. Methods of Protein Structure Comparison. In: Homology Modeling: Methods and Protocols . Humana Press. p. 231257. Lagerstro m MC , Schio th HB. 2008. Structural diversity of G protein-coupled receptors and significance for drug discovery. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 7:339357. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd2518 ,PMID: 18382464 Lamichhane R , Liu JJ, Pljevaljcic G, White KL, van der Schans E, Katritch V, Stevens RC, Wu thrich K, Millar DP. 2015. Single-molecule view of basal activity and activation mechanisms of the G protein-coupled receptor b2ar. PNAS 112:1425414259. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1519626112 ,PMID: 26578769 Lan TH , Liu Q, Li C, Wu G, Lambert NA. 2012. Sensitive and high resolution localization and tracking of membrane proteins in live cells with BRET. Traffic 13:14501456. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': '2012.01401.x ,PMID: 22816793 Lans I , Dalton JAR, Giraldo J. 2015. Helix 3 acts as a conformational hinge in class A GPCR activation: an analysis of interhelical interaction energies in crystal structures. Journal of Structural Biology 192:545553. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2015.10.019 ,PMID: 26522273 Latorraca NR , Venkatakrishnan AJ, Dror RO. 2017. GPCR dynamics: structures in motion. Chemical Reviews 117: 139155. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00177 ,PMID: 27622975 Latorraca NR , Wang JK, Bauer B, Townshend RJL, Hollingsworth SA, Olivieri JE, Xu HE, Sommer ME, Dror RO. 2018. Molecular mechanism of GPCR-mediated arrestin activation. Nature 557:452456. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41586-018-0077-3 ,PMID: 29720655 Leach K , Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. 2007. Allosteric GPCR modulators: taking advantage of permissive receptor pharmacology. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 28:382389. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': '2007.06.004 ,PMID: 17629965 Lee MH , Appleton KM, Strungs EG, Kwon JY, Morinelli TA, Peterson YK, Laporte SA, Luttrell LM. 2016. The conformational signature of b-arrestin2 predicts its trafficking and signalling functions. Nature 531:665668. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature17154 ,PMID: 27007854 Li J, Edwards PC, Burghammer M, Villa C, Schertler GF. 2004. Structure of bovine rhodopsin in a trigonal crystal form. Journal of Molecular Biology 343:14091438. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.08.090 ,PMID: 154 91621 Liang YL , Khoshouei M, Radjainia M, Zhang Y, Glukhova A, Tarrasch J, Thal DM, Furness SGB, Christopoulos G, Coudrat T, Danev R, Baumeister W, Miller LJ, Christopoulos A, Kobilka BK, Wootten D, Skiniotis G, Sexton PM. 2017. Phase-plate cryo-EM structure of a class B GPCR-G-protein complex. Nature 546:118123. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1038/nature22327 ,PMID: 28437792 Liu W , Chun E, Thompson AA, Chubukov P, Xu F, Katritch V, Han GW, Roth CB, Heitman LH, IJzerman AP, Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2012. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': 'Structural basis for allosteric regulation of GPCRs by sodium ions. Science 337: 232236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1219218 ,PMID: 22798613 Liu W , Wacker D, Gati C, Han GW, James D, Wang D, Nelson G, Weierstall U, Katritch V, Barty A, Zatsepin NA, Li D, Messerschmidt M, Boutet S, Williams GJ, Koglin JE, Seibert MM, Wang C, Shah ST, Basu S, et al. 2013. Serial femtosecond crystallography of G protein-coupled receptors. Science 342:15211524. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1126/science.1244142 ,PMID: 24357322 Liu X , Ahn S, Kahsai AW, Meng KC, Latorraca NR, Pani B, Venkatakrishnan AJ, Masoudi A, Weis WI, Dror RO, Chen X, Lefkowitz RJ, Kobilka BK. 2017. Mechanism of intracellular allosteric b2AR antagonist revealed by X-ray crystal structure. Nature 548:480484. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23652 ,PMID: 28813418 Liu X , Xu X, Hilger D, Aschauer P, Tiemann JKS, Du Y, Liu H, Hirata K, Sun X, Guixa ` -Gonza  lez R, Mathiesen JM, Hildebrand PW, Kobilka BK. 2019a. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': 'Structural insights into the process of GPCR-G protein complex formation. Cell177:12431251. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.021 Liu X , Masoudi A, Kahsai AW, Huang LY, Pani B, Staus DP, Shim PJ, Hirata K, Simhal RK, Schwalb AM, Rambarat PK, Ahn S, Lefkowitz RJ, Kobilka B. 2019b. Mechanism of b2AR regulation by an intracellular positive allosteric modulator. Science 364:12831287. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw8981 ,PMID: 31249059 Livingston KE , Mahoney JP, Manglik A, Sunahara RK, Traynor JR. 2018. Measuring ligand efficacy at the mu- opioid receptor using a conformational biosensor. eLife 7:e32499. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32499 , PMID: 29932421 Lu S , Zhang J. 2019. Small molecule allosteric modulators of G-Protein-Coupled receptors: drug-target interactions. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 62:2445. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01844 , PMID: 29457894 Lyu J , Wang S, Balius TE, Singh I, Levit A, Moroz YS, OMeara MJ, Che T, Algaa E, Tolmachova K, Tolmachev AA, Shoichet BK, Roth BL, Irwin JJ. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': '2019. Ultra-large library docking for discovering new chemotypes. Nature 566:224229. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0917-9 ,PMID: 30728502 Madabushi S , Gross AK, Philippi A, Meng EC, Wensel TG, Lichtarge O. 2004. Evolutionary trace of G protein- coupled receptors reveals clusters of residues that determine global and class-specific functions. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279:81268132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312671200 ,PMID: 14660595 Manglik A , Kruse AC, Kobilka TS, Thian FS, Mathiesen JM, Sunahara RK, Pardo L, Weis WI, Kobilka BK, Granier S. 2012. Crystal structure of the m-opioid receptor bound to a morphinan antagonist. Nature 485:321326. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10954 ,PMID: 22437502 Manglik A , Kim TH, Masureel M, Altenbach C, Yang Z, Hilger D, Lerch MT, Kobilka TS, Thian FS, Hubbell WL, Prosser RS, Kobilka BK. 2015. Structural insights into the dynamic process of b2-Adrenergic receptor signaling. Cell161:11011111. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 26, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.043 ,PMID: 25981665 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'Marsden B , Abagyan R. 2004. SADa normalized structural alignment database: improving sequence-structure alignments. Bioinformatics 20:23332344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth244 ,PMID: 150 87320 Mart -Solano M , Sanz F, Pastor M, Selent J. 2014. A dynamic view of molecular switch behavior at serotonin receptors: implications for functional selectivity. PLOS ONE 9:e109312. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0109312 ,PMID: 25313636 Massink A , Gutie  rrez-de-Tera  n H, Lenselink EB, Ortiz Zacar as NV, Xia L, Heitman LH, Katritch V, Stevens RC, IJzerman AP. 2015. Sodium ion binding pocket mutations and adenosine A2A receptor function. Molecular Pharmacology 87:305313. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.114.095737 ,PMID: 25473121 Masuho I , Ostrovskaya O, Kramer GM, Jones CD, Xie K, Martemyanov KA. 2015. Distinct profiles of functional discrimination among G proteins determine the actions of G protein-coupled receptors. Science Signaling 8: ra123. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aab4068 ,PMID: 26628681 Masureel M , Zou Y, Picard LP, van der Westhuizen E, Mahoney JP, Rodrigues J, Mildorf TJ, Dror RO, Shaw DE, Bouvier M, Pardon E, Steyaert J, Sunahara RK, Weis WI, Zhang C, Kobilka BK. 2018. Structural insights into binding specificity, efficacy and Bias of a b2AR partial agonist. Nature Chemical Biology 14:10591066. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-018-0145-x ,PMID: 30327561 May LT , Leach K, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. 2007. Allosteric modulation of G protein-coupled receptors. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 47:151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.47. 120505.105159 ,PMID: 17009927 McCorvy JD , Butler KV, Kelly B, Rechsteiner K, Karpiak J, Betz RM, Kormos BL, Shoichet BK, Dror RO, Jin J, Roth BL. 2018. Structure-inspired design of b-arrestin-biased ligands for aminergic GPCRs. Nature Chemical Biology 14:126134. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2527 ,PMID: 29227473 Miao Y , Nichols SE, Gasper PM, Metzger VT, McCammon JA. 2013. Activation and dynamic network of the M2 muscarinic receptor. PNAS 110:1098210987. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1309755110 ,PMID: 237 81107 Miao Y , Goldfeld DA, Moo EV, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A, McCammon JA, Valant C. 2016. Accelerated structure-based design of chemically diverse allosteric modulators of a muscarinic G protein-coupled receptor. PNAS 113:E5675E5684. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1612353113 ,PMID: 27601651 Mirny LA , Shakhnovich EI. 1999. Universally conserved positions in protein folds: reading evolutionary signals about stability, folding kinetics and function. Journal of Molecular Biology 291:177196. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2911 ,PMID: 10438614 Munk C , Mutt E, Isberg V, Nikolajsen LF, Bibbe JM, Flock T, Hanson MA, Stevens RC, Deupi X, Gloriam DE. 2019. An online resource for GPCR structure determination and analysis. Nature Methods 16:151162. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0302-x ,PMID: 30664776 Nagiri C , Shihoya W, Inoue A, Kadji FMN, Aoki J, Nureki O. 2019. Crystal structure of human endothelin ET Bb receptor in complex with peptide inverse agonist IRL2500. Communications Biology 2:236. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1038/s42003-019-0482-7 ,PMID: 31263780 Napier ML , Durga D, Wolsley CJ, Chamney S, Alexander S, Brennan R, Simpson DA, Silvestri G, Willoughby CE. 2015. Mutational analysis of the Rhodopsin gene in sector retinitis pigmentosa. Ophthalmic Genetics 36:239 243. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3109/13816810.2014.958862 ,PMID: 25265376 Nehme R, Carpenter B, Singhal A, Strege A, Edwards PC, White CF, Du H, Grisshammer R, Tate CG. 2017. Mini-G proteins: novel tools for studying GPCRs in their active conformation. PLOS ONE 12:e0175642. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175642 ,PMID: 28426733 Ngo T , Ilatovskiy AV, Stewart AG, Coleman JL, McRobb FM, Riek RP, Graham RM, Abagyan R, Kufareva I, Smith NJ. 2017. Orphan receptor ligand discovery by pickpocketing pharmacological neighbors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'Nature Chemical Biology 13:235242. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2266 ,PMID: 27992882 Nygaard R , Frimurer TM, Holst B, Rosenkilde MM, Schwartz TW. 2009. Ligand binding and micro-switches in 7tm receptor structures. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 30:249259. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2009. 02.006 ,PMID: 19375807 Nygaard R , Zou Y, Dror RO, Mildorf TJ, Arlow DH, Manglik A, Pan AC, Liu CW, Fung JJ, Bokoch MP, Thian FS, Kobilka TS, Shaw DE, Mueller L, Prosser RS, Kobilka BK. 2013. The dynamic process of b(2)-adrenergic receptor activation. Cell152:532542. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.008 ,PMID: 23374348 Okada T , Ernst OP, Palczewski K, Hofmann KP. 2001. Activation of rhodopsin: new insights from structural and biochemical studies. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 26:318324. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-0004(01) 01799-6 ,PMID: 11343925 Okashah N , Wan Q, Ghosh S, Sandhu M, Inoue A, Vaidehi N, Lambert NA. 2019. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'Variable G protein determinants of GPCR coupling selectivity. PNAS 116:1205412059. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1905993116 ,PMID: 31142646 Onaran HO , Rajagopal S, Costa T. 2014. What is biased efficacy? defining the relationship between intrinsic efficacy and free energy coupling. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 35:639647. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tips.2014.09.010 ,PMID: 25448316 Ortiz Zacar as NV , Lenselink EB, IJzerman AP, Handel TM, Heitman LH. 2018. Intracellular receptor modulation: novel approach to target GPCRs. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 39:547559. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tips.2018.03.002 ,PMID: 29653834 Oswald C , Rappas M, Kean J, Dore  AS, Errey JC, Bennett K, Deflorian F, Christopher JA, Jazayeri A, Mason JS, Congreve M, Cooke RM, Marshall FH. 2016. Intracellular allosteric antagonism of the CCR9 receptor. Nature 540:462465. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature20606 ,PMID: 27926729 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 27, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50279 27 of 31Research article Computational and Systems Biology Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': 'Pandy-Szekeres G , Munk C, Tsonkov TM, Mordalski S, Harpse K, Hauser AS, Bojarski AJ, Gloriam DE. 2018. GPCRdb in 2018: adding GPCR structure models and ligands. Nucleic Acids Research 46:D440D446. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1109 Pardon E , Laeremans T, Triest S, Rasmussen SGF, Wohlko nig A, Ruf A, Muyldermans S, Hol WGJ, Kobilka BK, Steyaert J. 2014. A general protocol for the generation of nanobodies for structural biology. Nature Protocols 9:674693. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2014.039 Pasel K . 2000. Functional characterization of the molecular defects causing nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in eight families. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 85:17031710. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/jc. 85.4.1703 Peng Y , McCorvy JD, Harpse K, Lansu K, Yuan S, Popov P, Qu L, Pu M, Che T, Nikolajsen LF, Huang XP, Wu Y, Shen L, Bjrn-Yoshimoto WE, Ding K, Wacker D, Han GW, Cheng J, Katritch V, Jensen AA, et al. 2018. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': '5-HT 2C receptor structures reveal the structural basis of GPCR polypharmacology. Cell172:719730. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.01.001 ,PMID: 29398112 Popov P , Peng Y, Shen L, Stevens RC, Cherezov V, Liu ZJ, Katritch V. 2018. Computational design of thermostabilizing point mutations for G protein-coupled receptors. eLife 7:e34729. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 7554/eLife.34729 ,PMID: 29927385 Ragnarsson L , Andersson A , Thomas WG, Lewis RJ. 2019. Mutations in the NPxxY motif stabilize pharmacologically distinct conformational states of the a1B- and b2-adrenoceptors. Science Signaling 12: eaas9485. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aas9485 ,PMID: 30862702 Rana BK , Shiina T, Insel PA. 2001. Genetic variations and polymorphisms of G protein-coupled receptors: functional and therapeutic implications. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 41:593624. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.41.1.593 ,PMID: 11264470 Rasmussen SG , DeVree BT, Zou Y, Kruse AC, Chung KY, Kobilka TS, Thian FS, Chae PS, Pardon E, Calinski D, Mathiesen JM, Shah ST, Lyons JA, Caffrey M, Gellman SH, Steyaert J, Skiniotis G, Weis WI, Sunahara RK, Kobilka BK. 2011a. Crystal structure of the b2 adrenergic receptor-Gs protein complex. Nature 477:549555. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10361 ,PMID: 21772288 Rasmussen SG , Choi HJ, Fung JJ, Pardon E, Casarosa P, Chae PS, Devree BT, Rosenbaum DM, Thian FS, Kobilka TS, Schnapp A, Konetzki I, Sunahara RK, Gellman SH, Pautsch A, Steyaert J, Weis WI, Kobilka BK. 2011b. Structure of a nanobody-stabilized active state of the b(2) adrenoceptor. Nature 469:175180. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1038/nature09648 ,PMID: 21228869 Renaud JP , Chari A, Ciferri C, Liu WT, Re  migy HW, Stark H, Wiesmann C. 2018. Cryo-EM in drug discovery: achievements, limitations and prospects. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 17:471492. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1038/nrd.2018.77 ,PMID: 29880918 Robertson N , Rappas M, Dore  AS, Brown J, Bottegoni G, Koglin M, Cansfield J, Jazayeri A, Cooke RM, Marshall FH. 2018. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': 'Structure of the complement C5a receptor bound to the extra-helical antagonist NDT9513727. Nature 553:111114. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25025 ,PMID: 29300009 Rodriguez GJ , Yao R, Lichtarge O, Wensel TG. 2010. Evolution-guided discovery and recoding of allosteric pathway specificity determinants in psychoactive bioamine receptors. PNAS 107:77877792. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1073/pnas.0914877107 ,PMID: 20385837 Rosenbaum DM , Cherezov V, Hanson MA, Rasmussen SG, Thian FS, Kobilka TS, Choi HJ, Yao XJ, Weis WI, Stevens RC, Kobilka BK. 2007. GPCR engineering yields high-resolution structural insights into beta2- adrenergic receptor function. Science 318:12661273. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1150609 , PMID: 17962519 Rosenbaum DM , Rasmussen SG, Kobilka BK. 2009. The structure and function of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 459:356363. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08144 ,PMID: 19458711 Roth CB , Hanson MA, Stevens RC. 2008. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': 'Stabilization of the human beta2-adrenergic receptor TM4-TM3-TM5 Helix interface by mutagenesis of Glu122(3.41), a critical residue in GPCR structure. Journal of Molecular Biology 376:13051319. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.028 ,PMID: 18222471 Roth BL , Irwin JJ, Shoichet BK. 2017. Discovery of new GPCR ligands to illuminate new biology. Nature Chemical Biology 13:11431151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2490 ,PMID: 29045379 Sandhu M , Touma AM, Dysthe M, Sadler F, Sivaramakrishnan S, Vaidehi N. 2019. Conformational plasticity of the intracellular cavity of GPCR-G-protein complexes leads to G-protein promiscuity and selectivity. PNAS 116: 1195611965. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1820944116 ,PMID: 31138704 Schmid CL , Kennedy NM, Ross NC, Lovell KM, Yue Z, Morgenweck J, Cameron MD, Bannister TD, Bohn LM. 2017. Bias factor and therapeutic window correlate to predict safer opioid analgesics. Cell171:11651175. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 28, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.035 ,PMID: 29149605 Schoneberg T , Hofreiter M, Schulz A, Ro mpler H. 2007. Learning from the past: evolution of GPCR functions. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 28:117121. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2007.01.001 ,PMID: 172 80721 Schonegge AM , Gallion J, Picard LP, Wilkins AD, Le Gouill C, Audet M, Stallaert W, Lohse MJ, Kimmel M, Lichtarge O, Bouvier M. 2017. Evolutionary action and structural basis of the allosteric switch controlling b2AR functional selectivity. Nature Communications 8:2169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02257-x , PMID: 29255305 Shao Z , Yan W, Chapman K, Ramesh K, Ferrell AJ, Yin J, Wang X, Xu Q, Rosenbaum DM. 2019. Structure of an allosteric modulator bound to the CB1 cannabinoid receptor. Nature Chemical Biology 15:11991205. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-019-0387-2 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'Shihoya W , Nishizawa T, Yamashita K, Inoue A, Hirata K, Kadji FMN, Okuta A, Tani K, Aoki J, Fujiyoshi Y, Doi T, Nureki O. 2017. X-ray structures of endothelin ETB receptor bound to clinical antagonist bosentan and its analog. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 24:758764. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.3450 Shimada I , Ueda T, Kofuku Y, Eddy MT, Wu thrich K. 2019. GPCR drug discovery: integrating solution NMR data with crystal and cryo-EM structures. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 18:5982. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ nrd.2018.180 ,PMID: 30410121 Smart OS , Horsky V, Gore S, Svobodova  Var ekova  R, Bendova  V, Kleywegt GJ, Velankar S. 2018. Validation of ligands in macromolecular structures determined by X-ray crystallography. Acta Crystallographica Section D Structural Biology 74:228236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798318002541 Smit MJ , Vischer HF, Bakker RA, Jongejan A, Timmerman H, Pardo L, Leurs R. 2007. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'Pharmacogenomic and structural analysis of constitutive g protein-coupled receptor activity. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 47:5387. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.47.120505.105126 ,PMID: 17029567 Smith JS , Lefkowitz RJ, Rajagopal S. 2018. Biased signalling: from simple switches to allosteric microprocessors. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 17:243260. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd.2017.229 ,PMID: 29302067 Solt AS , Bostock MJ, Shrestha B, Kumar P, Warne T, Tate CG, Nietlispach D. 2017. Insight into partial agonism by observing multiple equilibria for ligand-bound and G s-mimetic nanobody-bound b1-adrenergic receptor. Nature Communications 8:1795. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02008-y ,PMID: 29176642 Sounier R , Mas C, Steyaert J, Laeremans T, Manglik A, Huang W, Kobilka BK, De  me  ne  H, Granier S. 2015. Propagation of conformational changes during m-opioid receptor activation. Nature 524:375378. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1038/nature14680 ,PMID: 26245377 Spehr M , Munger SD. 2009. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'Olfactory receptors: g protein-coupled receptors and beyond. Journal of Neurochemistry 109:15701583. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06085.x ,PMID: 19383089 Stauch B , Cherezov V. 2018. Serial femtosecond crystallography of G Protein-Coupled receptors. Annual Review of Biophysics 47:377397. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys-070317-033239 ,PMID: 29543504 Staus DP , Strachan RT, Manglik A, Pani B, Kahsai AW, Kim TH, Wingler LM, Ahn S, Chatterjee A, Masoudi A, Kruse AC, Pardon E, Steyaert J, Weis WI, Prosser RS, Kobilka BK, Costa T, Lefkowitz RJ. 2016. Allosteric nanobodies reveal the dynamic range and diverse mechanisms of G-protein-coupled receptor activation. Nature 535:448452. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18636 ,PMID: 27409812 Sung YM , Wilkins AD, Rodriguez GJ, Wensel TG, Lichtarge O. 2016. Intramolecular allosteric communication in dopamine D2 receptor revealed by evolutionary amino acid covariation. PNAS 113:35393544. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1516579113 ,PMID: 26979958 Tan L , Yan W, McCorvy JD, Cheng J. 2018. Biased ligands of G Protein-Coupled receptors (GPCRs): Structure Functional Selectivity Relationships (SFSRs) and Therapeutic Potential. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 61:9841 9878. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.8b00435 Tao YX . 2006. Inactivating mutations of G protein-coupled receptors and diseases: structure-function insights and therapeutic implications. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 111:949973. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. pharmthera.2006.02.008 ,PMID: 16616374 Tao YX . 2008. Constitutive activation of G protein-coupled receptors and diseases: insights into mechanisms of activation and therapeutics. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 120:129148. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. pharmthera.2008.07.005 ,PMID: 18768149 Tehan BG , Bortolato A, Blaney FE, Weir MP, Mason JS. 2014. Unifying family A GPCR theories of activation. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 143:5160. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.02.004 , PMID: 24561131 Thal DM , Glukhova A, Sexton PM, Christopoulos A. 2018. Structural insights into G-protein-coupled receptor allostery. Nature 559:4553. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0259-z ,PMID: 29973731 The UniProt Consortium . 2017. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Research 45:D158 D169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1099 ,PMID: 27899622 Thompson MD , Hendy GN, Percy ME, Bichet DG, Cole DE. 2014. G protein-coupled receptor mutations and human genetic disease. Methods in Molecular Biology 1175 :153187. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1- 4939-0956-8_8 ,PMID: 25150870 Tian H , Furstenberg A, Huber T. 2017. Labeling and Single-Molecule Methods To Monitor G Protein-Coupled Receptor Dynamics. Chemical Reviews 117:186245. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00084 Trzaskowski B , Latek D, Yuan S, Ghoshdastider U, Debinski A, Filipek S. 2012. Action of molecular switches in GPCRstheoretical and experimental studies. Current Medicinal Chemistry 19:10901109. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.2174/092986712799320556 ,PMID: 22300046 Tsai CJ , Pamula F, Nehme  R, Mu hle J, Weinert T, Flock T, Nogly P, Edwards PC, Carpenter B, Gruhl T, Ma P, Deupi X, Standfuss J, Tate CG, Schertler GFX. 2018. Crystal structure of rhodopsin in complex with a mini-G o sheds light on the principles of G protein selectivity. Science Advances 4:eaat7052. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1126/sciadv.aat7052 ,PMID: 30255144 Van Eps N , Altenbach C, Caro LN, Latorraca NR, Hollingsworth SA, Dror RO, Ernst OP, Hubbell WL. 2018. Gi- and Gs-coupled GPCRs show different modes of G-protein binding. PNAS 115:23832388. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1073/pnas.1721896115 Vass M , Kooistra AJ, Yang D, Stevens RC, Wang MW, de Graaf C. 2018. Chemical Diversity in the G Protein- Coupled Receptor Superfamily. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 39:494512. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.tips.2018.02.004 ,PMID: 29576399 Vassart G , Costagliola S. 2011. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 29, 'content': 'G protein-coupled receptors: mutations and endocrine diseases. Nature Reviews Endocrinology 7:362372. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2011.20 ,PMID: 21301490 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'Venkatakrishnan AJ , Deupi X, Lebon G, Tate CG, Schertler GF, Babu MM. 2013. Molecular signatures of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 494:185194. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11896 , PMID: 23407534 Venkatakrishnan AJ , Deupi X, Lebon G, Heydenreich FM, Flock T, Miljus T, Balaji S, Bouvier M, Veprintsev DB, Tate CG, Schertler GF, Babu MM. 2016. Diverse activation pathways in class A GPCRs converge near the G-protein-coupling region. Nature 536:484487. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19107 ,PMID: 27525504 Venkatakrishnan AJ , Ma AK, Fonseca R, Latorraca NR, Kelly B, Betz RM, Asawa C, Kobilka BK, Dror RO. 2019. Diverse GPCRs exhibit conserved water networks for stabilization and activation. PNAS 116:32883293. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1809251116 ,PMID: 30728297 Verdonk ML , Cole JC, Hartshorn MJ, Murray CW, Taylor RD. 2003. Improved protein-ligand docking using GOLD. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 52:609623. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.10465 , PMID: 12910460 Vickery ON , Carvalheda CA, Zaidi SA, Pisliakov AV, Katritch V, Zachariae U. 2018. Intracellular Transfer of Na+in an Active-State G-Protein-Coupled Receptor. Structure 26:171180. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2017.11. 013,PMID: 29249607 Wang S , Sun S, Li Z, Zhang R, Xu J. 2017. Accurate de novo prediction of protein contact map by ultra-deep learning model. PLOS Computational Biology 13:e1005324. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi. 1005324 ,PMID: 28056090 Warne T , Serrano-Vega MJ, Tate CG, Schertler GF. 2009. Development and crystallization of a minimal thermostabilised G protein-coupled receptor. Protein Expression and Purification 65:204213. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1016/j.pep.2009.01.014 ,PMID: 19297694 Weierstall U , James D, Wang C, White TA, Wang D, Liu W, Spence JC, Bruce Doak R, Nelson G, Fromme P, Fromme R, Grotjohann I, Kupitz C, Zatsepin NA, Liu H, Basu S, Wacker D, Han GW, Katritch V, Boutet S, et al. 2014. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'Lipidic cubic phase injector facilitates membrane protein serial femtosecond crystallography. Nature Communications 5:3309. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4309 ,PMID: 24525480 Weis WI , Kobilka BK. 2018. The molecular basis of G Protein-Coupled receptor activation. Annual Review of Biochemistry 87:897919. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-033910 ,PMID: 29925258 Wescott MP , Kufareva I, Paes C, Goodman JR, Thaker Y, Puffer BA, Berdougo E, Rucker JB, Handel TM, Doranz BJ. 2016. Signal transmission through the CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) transmembrane helices. PNAS 113:99289933. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1601278113 ,PMID: 27543332 Whalen EJ , Rajagopal S, Lefkowitz RJ. 2011. Therapeutic potential of b-arrestin- and G protein-biased agonists. Trends in Molecular Medicine 17:126139. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2010.11.004 ,PMID: 211 83406 White KL , Eddy MT, Gao ZG, Han GW, Lian T, Deary A, Patel N, Jacobson KA, Katritch V, Stevens RC. 2018. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'Structural connection between activation microswitch and allosteric sodium site in GPCR signaling. Structure 26:259269. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2017.12.013 ,PMID: 29395784 Wingler LM , Elgeti M, Hilger D, Latorraca NR, Lerch MT, Staus DP, Dror RO, Kobilka BK, Hubbell WL, Lefkowitz RJ. 2019. Angiotensin analogs with divergent Bias stabilize distinct receptor conformations. Cell176:468478. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.005 ,PMID: 30639099 Wootten D , Reynolds CA, Smith KJ, Mobarec JC, Koole C, Savage EE, Pabreja K, Simms J, Sridhar R, Furness SGB, Liu M, Thompson PE, Miller LJ, Christopoulos A, Sexton PM. 2016. The extracellular surface of the GLP-1 receptor is a molecular trigger for biased agonism. Cell165:16321643. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2016.05.023 ,PMID: 27315480 Wootten D , Christopoulos A, Marti-Solano M, Babu MM, Sexton PM. 2018. Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 19:638653. DOI: https://doi. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'org/10.1038/s41580-018-0049-3 ,PMID: 30104700 Wu H , Wacker D, Mileni M, Katritch V, Han GW, Vardy E, Liu W, Thompson AA, Huang XP, Carroll FI, Mascarella SW, Westkaemper RB, Mosier PD, Roth BL, Cherezov V, Stevens RC. 2012. Structure of the human k-opioid receptor in complex with JDTic. Nature 485:327332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10939 , PMID: 22437504 Wu Y , Tong J, Ding K, Zhou Q, Zhao S. 2019. GPCR Allosteric Modulator Discovery. In: Protein Allostery in Drug Discovery . Springer. p. 225251. Yang F , Xiao P, Qu CX, Liu Q, Wang LY, Liu ZX, He QT, Liu C, Xu JY, Li RR, Li MJ, Li Q, Guo XZ, Yang ZY, He DF, Yi F, Ruan K, Shen YM, Yu X, Sun JP, et al. 2018. Allosteric mechanisms underlie GPCR signaling to SH3- domain proteins through arrestin. Nature Chemical Biology 14:876886. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589- 018-0115-3 ,PMID: 30120361 Yao XJ , Ve  lez Ruiz G, Whorton MR, Rasmussen SG, DeVree BT, Deupi X, Sunahara RK, Kobilka B. 2009. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 30, 'content': 'The effect of ligand efficacy on the formation and stability of a GPCR-G protein complex. PNAS 106:95019506. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0811437106 ,PMID: 19470481 Ye L , Van Eps N, Zimmer M, Ernst OP, Prosser RS. 2016. Activation of the A2A adenosine G-protein-coupled receptor by conformational selection. Nature 533:265268. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature17668 , PMID: 27144352 Ye L , Neale C, Sljoka A, Lyda B, Pichugin D, Tsuchimura N, Larda ST, Pome ` s R, Garc a AE, Ernst OP, Sunahara RK, Prosser RS. 2018. Mechanistic insights into allosteric regulation of the A 2AAdenosine G protein-coupled receptor by physiological cations. Nature Communications 9:1372. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018- 03314-9 ,PMID: 29636462 Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 31, 'content': 'Yuan S , Vogel H, Filipek S. 2013. The role of water and sodium ions in the activation of the m-opioid receptor. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 52:1011210115. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201302244 , PMID: 23904331 Yuan S , Filipek S, Palczewski K, Vogel H. 2014. Activation of G-protein-coupled receptors correlates with the formation of a continuous internal water pathway. Nature Communications 5:4733. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1038/ncomms5733 ,PMID: 25203160 Yuan S , Filipek S, Vogel H. 2016. A gating mechanism of the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor. Structure 24:816825. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2016.03.019 ,PMID: 27112600 Zerbino DR , Achuthan P, Akanni W, Amode MR, Barrell D, Bhai J, Billis K, Cummins C, Gall A, Giro  n CG, Gil L, Gordon L, Haggerty L, Haskell E, Hourlier T, Izuogu OG, Janacek SH, Juettemann T, To JK, Laird MR, et al. 2018. Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Research 46:D754D761. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 31, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1098 , PMID: 29155950 Zhang H , Unal H, Gati C, Han GW, Liu W, Zatsepin NA, James D, Wang D, Nelson G, Weierstall U, Sawaya MR, Xu Q, Messerschmidt M, Williams GJ, Boutet S, Yefanov OM, White TA, Wang C, Ishchenko A, Tirupula KC, et al. 2015. Structure of the angiotensin receptor revealed by serial femtosecond crystallography. Cell161: 833844. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.011 ,PMID: 25913193 Zhang Y , Sun B, Feng D, Hu H, Chu M, Qu Q, Tarrasch JT, Li S, Sun Kobilka T, Kobilka BK, Skiniotis G. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of the activated GLP-1 receptor in complex with a G protein. Nature 546:248253. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22394 ,PMID: 28538729 Zheng Y , Qin L, Zacar asNV, de Vries H, Han GW, Gustavsson M, Dabros M, Zhao C, Cherney RJ, Carter P, Stamos D, Abagyan R, Cherezov V, Stevens RC, IJzerman AP, Heitman LH, Tebben A, Kufareva I, Handel TM. 2016. Structure of CC chemokine receptor 2 with orthosteric and allosteric antagonists. Nature 540:458461. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs', 'page': 31, 'content': 'DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature20605 ,PMID: 27926736 Zhou XE , He Y, de Waal PW, Gao X, Kang Y, Van Eps N, Yin Y, Pal K, Goswami D, White TA, Barty A, Latorraca NR, Chapman HN, Hubbell WL, Dror RO, Stevens RC, Cherezov V, Gurevich VV, Griffin PR, Ernst OP, et al. 2017. Identification of phosphorylation codes for arrestin recruitment by G protein-coupled receptors. Cell 170:457469. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.002 Zhou Q . 2019. RRCS (Residue-residue contact score). GitHub . 2f9a555. https://github.com/zhaolabSHT/RRCS Zhou et al. eLife 2019;8:e50279. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': '18 may 2017 | VOL 545 | N aTURE | 317aRTicLE doi:10.1038/nature22070 Selectivity determinants of   GPCRG-protein binding Tilman Flock1,2, alexander S. Hauser3, Nadia Lund3, David E. Gloriam3, Santhanam Balaji1 & m. madan Babu1 Membrane protein receptors trigger the appropriate cellular response  to extracellular stimuli by selective interaction with cytosolic adaptor   proteins. In humans, GPCRs form the largest family of receptors, with  over 800 members13. Although GPCRs bind a staggering number of  natural ligands (~  1,000), they primarily couple to only four major G   families encoded by 16 human genes3,4. Members of each of the four  families regulate key effectors (for example, adenylate cyclase, phospho - lipase C, etc.) and the generation of secondary messengers (for example,  cAMP , Ca2+, IP3, etc.) that in turn trigger distinct signalling cascades5,6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': ' Thus, the selective binding of ligand-activated GPCRs to their appro - priate G   proteins is critical for signal transduction5. Typically, ligand binding to a receptor leads to the recruitment of  a heterotrimeric G protein (G    ), nucleotide exchange in G   and  dissociation of the G-protein subunits7 (Fig. 1a). However, several   distinct receptors can couple to the same G   protein (Fig. 1b;    1 adrenergic receptor8 and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT 6) receptor9  can both activate G  s proteins, resulting in heart muscle contraction  and excitatory neurotransmission, respectively3). Receptors can also  couple to more than one G   protein (Fig. 1b;  2 adrenergic receptor  ( 2AR) primarily couples to G  s proteins, resulting in smooth mus - cle relaxation but can also couple to G  i to inhibit this response10).  An analysis of the reported G-protein coupling data highlights the  complexity of coupling selectivity in the receptorG-protein signal - ling system (Fig. 1c, d , Extended Data Fig. 1a, b and Supplementary  Data). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Although coupling selectivity could be achieved by regulating gene  expression in a cell-type-specific manner and altering relative expres - sion levels, many different receptors and G  proteins are expressed  simultaneously in several cell types (Extended Data Fig. 2). This sug - gests that residues at the GPCRG-protein interface play a role in deter - mining selectivity. Despite considerable progress studying individual  receptorG-protein interactions and complexes1117 (Supplementary  Table 1), elucidating the molecular basis of selective binding has been  challenging. Here, we infer selectivity determinants (that is, positions  and patterns of amino acids) at the interaction interface for the entire  GPCRG-protein signalling system and present a resource (http://www. gpcrdb.org/ tab Signal Proteins) for each of the ~ 800 human receptors  and 16 G   proteins.GPCR and G   protein repertoires Understanding how GPCRs and G   proteins evolve could pro - vide insights into the constraints underlying selective coupling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': ' The genomes of unicellular sister groups of metazoans (diverged   ~ 900million years ago) encode a small number of genes for the GPCR G-protein system2,18,19 (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Nevertheless, they have  representatives of all four human G   protein families, class B and class  C GPCRs (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Although class A receptors were  not detectable in this group, some unicellular fungi contain members  of this class20. The genome of Trichoplax adhaerens, one of the earliest-   branching multicellular animals, has representatives of all four human  G  families, as well as class A GPCRs that have undergone widespread  gene duplication (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Whereas most human G  proteins have orthologues across organisms, only a few human  GPCRs have orthologues that can be traced back to early-branching  organisms (Fig. 2a and Extended Data Fig. 4a). Overall, GPCRs (espe - cially class A) have undergone a larger lineage-specific diversifica - tion in gene number and sequence than G   proteins (Extended Data   Fig. 3a). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Thus, different organisms have a large number of GPCRs that  is unique (that is, not orthologous to the human receptors; Fig. 2a). In  contrast, the G   repertoire remained comparable across organisms.  A comparative analysis (Jaccard similarity, J ; Fig. 2b , Extended Data   Fig. 4b and Methods) revealed that the G   repertoire is more static  (average J =  0.98;  =  0.03) than the more dynamic GPCR repertoire  (average J =  0.65;  =  0.36). These results suggest that G   protein  sequences are likely to be under higher evolutionary constraint as they  need to couple to diverse receptors that have evolved independently on  multiple occasions in different organisms. Subtype-specific residues in G   proteins Selectivity-determining positions can be inferred by comparing the  conservation of every residue in a protein with its paralogues and their  corresponding orthologues (Fig. 3a)21. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': 'We applied this principle to each  of the 16 human G   protein subtypes by comparing them with their  respective one-to-one orthologues from 66 genomes and identified the highly conserved, subtype-specifically conserved and neutrally  evolving positions (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 5a and Supplementary  Data). For instance, in G  s proteins, 107 positions are highly conserved  The selective coupling of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to specific G proteins is critical to trigger the appropriate  physiological response. However, the determinants of selective binding have remained elusive. Here we reveal the  existence of a selectivity barcode (that is, patterns of amino acids) on each of the 16 human G proteins that is recognized  by distinct regions on the approximately 800 human receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Although universally conserved positions in the barcode  allow the receptors to bind and activate G proteins in a similar manner, different receptors recognize the unique positions  of the G-protein barcode through distinct residues, like multiple keys (receptors) opening the same lock (G protein)  using non-identical cuts. Considering the evolutionary history of GPCRs allows the identification of these selectivity- determining residues. These findings lay the foundation for understanding the molecular basis of coupling selectivity  within individual receptors and G proteins. 1MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. 2Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge CB3 0DG, UK. 3Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University  of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 2, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'article reSearcH318 | N aTURE | VOL 545 | 18 may 2017in all G  s orthologues and human paralogues. Mapping this informa - tion onto the GDP-bound form of the G   protein structure showed  that they typically map to the protein core, and hence are likely to  be important for common functions for the entire G   family, such  as protein folding and structural stability (Fig. 3b and Extended Data   Fig. 5b). Other conserved residues are on the protein surface, map  to the nucleotide-binding pocket, or to the core of the   -,  effector-  and  receptor-binding interface (magenta residues in Fig. 3b, c). One   hundred and fifty positions evolve neutrally and are primarily  present  on the protein surface (Fig. 3b , beige residues). One hundred and   fifty-four positions are variable among the G  paralogues, but the   specific  residue is conserved among all the G  s orthologues (Fig. 3b ,  cyan residues). Several of these positions map primarily to the  protein  surface (Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': '5b), suggesting that they could deter - mine the selective binding of G   to distinct     subunits, effectors and  GPCRs. Selectivity barcode in G   proteins By analysing the structures of  2 adrenergic receptorG  s protein,   rhodopsinG  t peptide and A 2A adenosine receptor-engineered mini  G s protein complexes using the common G   numbering (CGN)   system22, we identified a total of 25 CGN positions that contact the  receptor (Methods). Several of these positions in G  i mediate an interac - tion with rhodopsin as shown through alanine scanning experiments23   (Supplementary Data). We find that the conserved CGN positions form  clusters at the receptorG   interface ( Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 5c ;   mainly H5 of G  ; also discussed in ref. 22). In contrast, the subtype-   specific positions surround the conserved positions at the interface  (Extended Data Fig. 5c) and reside in HN, H4, S1/3 and H5 of G  s   in the   2ARG  s protein structure (Extended Data Fig. 6). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'While  the conserved positions at the interface are important for activation  and indicate that the binding orientation is likely to be similar among  the different receptorG   complexes22, the subtype-specific residues  around the conserved core constitute a selectivity barcode that can  contribute to selective binding by the different receptors. In this man - ner, each of the 16 G   paralogues presents a unique combination of  residues around a conserved interface that can determine selectivity at the receptorG-protein interface (Fig. 3d). We note that different  G  subtypes may undergo rotation and translation of H5 to different  extent at the receptorG-protein interface. This may expose additional  residues, contributing to the selectivity barcode. The G   selectivity-determining positions at the interface show varia - tion in the fraction of charged and hydrophobic residues suggesting that  electrostatic properties and chemical composition of the interface vary  between different G proteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'To infer positions near the interface that  can influence binding selectivity (that is, possible pre-coupling sites), G/uni03B1iG/uni03B1sG/uni03B1s/uni03B22AR 5-HT6/uni03B21AR GPCR G/uni03B1 Multiple r eceptor types interact with same G/uni03B1 pr oteinSame r eceptor interacts with multiple G/uni03B1 pr oteins~800 re ceptors ~1,000 ligands4 G/uni03B1 families 16 G/uni03B1 genes Conserved allosteric activation mechanism of G/uni03B1 by GPCRs da b c  G/uni03B1sGPCRs G-protein familiesG/uni03B1i/oG/uni03B1q/11G/uni03B112/13For example 5-HT7 2877 35 115 19 140 45 14 1 28 2G/uni03B1s G/uni03B1i/o G/uni03B1q/11 G/uni03B112/13 Figure 1 | Selectivity in GPCRG-protein signalling. a , GPCRs activate  G proteins through a conserved mechanism. b , The same G protein can  be activated by different receptors, and the same receptor can couple to  different G proteins. c , Network representation of the currently available  G-protein coupling data of class A GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'd , Numbers of receptors   (all GPCR classes) coupling to different (sets of) G proteins.1616 16 25 36 1,633 800 8 2 16 91 6 20 2 16424 114 711 703 1,023 146192 260 39565 415 7 1H. sapiens: 16 H. sapiens: 16 H. sapiens: 16 H. sapiens: 16 H. sapiens: 16M. musculus: 16 S. purpuratus: 10 D. melanogaster: 9 C. elegans: 22 C. owczarzak i: 8 16 2H. sapiens: 825 H. sapiens: 825 H. sapiens: 825 H. sapiens: 825 H. sapiens: 825M. musculus: 1,669 S. purpuratus:  1,127 D. melanogaster:  231 C. elegans: 1,169 C. owczarzaki : 48 16 47 815 110410Rodents Echinoidea (sea ur chin) Diptera Nematodes Opisthokont a (amoeboid) G protein GPCR 0.00.20.40.60.81.0 OrganismM. brevicollis T. adhaerensN. vectensis C. elegans D. melanogasterS. purpuratusB. oridae D. rerio X. tropicalisG. gallus M. musculusC. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'owczarzakiJaccard index As + Bs As + Bs + Au + BuJ =AsAuBuBsOrganism B Organism Aa Holozoa Metazoa Deuter ostomes ProtostomesG/uni03B1 pr otein r epertoir e GPCR r epertoir e b16 1 247 Figure 2 | Asymmetric evolution of the GPCR and G  protein  repertoire. a, GPCR and G-protein repertoires of humans and five  organisms from different lineages (see Extended Data Fig. 4b). Fraction   of proteins in each organism that are related (dark grey) or unique (white)  is shown. M. musculus, Mus musculus ; H. sapiens, Homo sapiens;   S. purpuratus , Strongylocentrotus purpuratus ; D. melanogaster, Drosophila  melanogaster, C. elegans, Caenorhabditis elegans; C. owczarzaki,  Capsaspora owczarzaki. b, Evolutionary dynamics (Jaccard similarity  index) of GPCRs (light grey) and G proteins (dark grey) between humans and 12 organisms. Subscripts u and s for organisms A and B refer to the number of unique and shared genes, respectively. The higher fraction of human receptors shared with T. adhaerens and Nematostella vectensis highlights the fact that these organisms shared a complex gene repertoire with human, which was lost in some other lineages (for example, insects).  M. brevicollis , Monosiga brevicollis ; B. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 2, 'content': 'floridae , Branchiostoma floridae ;    D. rerio, Danio rerio ; X. tropicalis , Xenopus tropicalis ; G. gallus, Gallus  gallus .  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'article reSearcH18 may 2017 | VOL 545 | N aTURE | 319we identified surface-accessible, selectivity-determining positions that  are not part of either the receptor-, nucleotide- or effector-binding   positions. For this, we analysed all available structures of G   proteins  bound to the nucleotide,     or different effectors (Supplementary Data).  By integrating evolutionary information with biochemical data23, we  identified positions in each of the 16 G proteins that might possibly play  a role in pre-coupling (Supplementary Data and Methods). Biochemical studies on individual G proteins support the identified  positions as determinants of selectivity (Supplementary Table 1). For  instance, replacement of the five carboxy (C)-terminal amino acids in  H5 (which contain three selectivity-determining positions) of G  q24  or G s proteins25,26 with corresponding residues from G  i changed the  receptor selectivity profile to that of G  i. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Overall, our approach makes  use of all available sequence, structural and comprehensive biochemical  data to infer selectivity determinants (selectivity barcode) on each of  the 16 G proteins (Fig. 3d). Using the CGN system, we have mapped  this information onto a snake-like diagram for each of the 16 different  G  proteins. We present an interactive web resource that highlights  these selectivity-determining positions for a user-determined cut-off  value (Methods). In this manner, researchers can be liberal or conser - vative in inferring such positions in any human G   protein of interest. Recognition of G   barcode by GPCRs Selectivity in protein interactions is achieved by non-covalent contacts  between residues of interacting proteins27. To understand how the  receptor might recognize the G   selectivity barcode, we analysed22,28,29  the inter- and intra-protein non-covalent contact networks of the    2ARG  s protein structure15. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'We identified spatially distinct clusters  of residues on the receptor and G protein that extensively contact each  other at the interface (Fig. 4a, b). The G  s protein selectivity barcode  is primarily contacted by positions in the TM5 extension and ICL3  of the   2AR, with contributions from TM6 and ICL2 (Extended Data   Fig. 6a, b). Investigation of the A 2A adenosine receptor-engineered  mini G  s protein structure using the GPCRdb numbering scheme4  (structure-based generic residue numbers) revealed that the binding  mode is highly similar to the complex of   2ARG  s complex (root  mean square deviation of equivalent C   atoms  =  1.7 ) and that equi- valent receptor secondary structure elements contact similar regions on  the G s protein ( Extended Data Fig. 7a ). Despite this overall similarity  in the positions that make the contact, there are substantial differences  in terms of the exact contacts that these positions make at the interface  (Fig. 4c). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Thus, while the same positions of the G protein and GPCRs  may be involved in the recognition, distinct residues (both positions  and the amino-acid residue) on the two different receptors contact  them (Extended Data Fig. 7b). In other words, the same selectivity  barcode presented by G  s is read differently by receptors belonging  to different subtypes. In the following section, we address why evolu - tionarily related receptors use different residues to selectively couple  to the same G  protein. GPCR history and selectivity determinants Since GPCR repertoires expanded by gene duplication, we elucidated  the scenarios for the evolution of coupling selectivity (Fig. 5a, b). Upon  duplication, both GPCR copies are identical and hence will inherit the  ancestral receptor properties. During divergence, each duplicate may  accumulate mutations such that they (1) maintain G-protein selectivity  but alter ligand-binding property (for example, olfactory receptors) or  (2) alter G-protein selectivity but maintain ligand-binding property (for  example, adrenoceptors). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'In subsequent duplication and divergence  events, they may accumulate mutations that allow binding to a different   or additional G protein and/or ligand. Thus, although two extant receptors couple to the same G protein, their evolutionary history    can be different. If they inherited their selectivity from a common  ancestor, they will share the same or similar set of interface residues that  determine G-protein selectivity. However, if one of the receptors altered  its selectivity from a common ancestor, it is more likely that a different   set of interface residues might determine the coupling preference   (Fig. 5a, b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Therefore, the evolutionary history of receptors that couple to  F F VDINL L A  A  A A  R   R R  R   K  R I V  V V V V D D EKKK K K QK E KK KK L L I VVLV LV ILLL L I LF FFF FF FF F FF FF F VLL REE E L E VL L QE SD R  D RDR DD D DDD M L RRT KKT IY I  P PVY F F F FF FF FF FF F F FFF V VVVVV VV C VC V V VVT KT TT TR TTR T KKK KDDD D DDDD DD DD D DD DI IIII II II I II VII II III LI LQ LIQ LLI I LQ HQAR KK K K K QR QK QN NNNHH NN NN NN  NN NL LL L LL L LL LL LL L LLK RK K RK KKKK KKR K D YDQ ED D E E EGDQ QDFIY CC IC CCCY C Y LYGGG MGE N NG ME G G N G L LLL LLL LL L LL L LL QVL YL F V QF F FY F VCParalogues GNA13GNA12GNA15GNA14GNA11GNAQGNAZGNAOGNA T3GNA T2GNA T1GNAI3GNAI2GNAI1GNALGNAS2 G.hns1.2 G.hns1.3 G.S1.2 G.s2s3.1 G.S3.1 G.S3.3 G.H4.26 G.H4.27 G.h4s6.3 G.h4s6.20 G.H5.8 G.H5.11 G.H5.12 G.H5.13 G.H5.15 G.H5.16G.H5.17 G.H5.19 G.H5.20 G.H5.21 G.H5.22 G.H5.23 G.H5.24 G.H5.25 G.H5.26CGNConsensus sequences of  16 orthologue alignmentsInterface positions fr om pr otein complex structure s of /uni03B22ARGs, A2ARGs, RhoGt  .........Orthologue conservation Low High GsGi1 Paralogue conservation Low HighOrthologue-speci/f_ic, e.g. selectivity- determining  residues 154 (36%)Conserved, e.g. pr otein folding, protein stablity, nucleotide binding 107 (25%) Evolutionary neutral, e.g. linkers 150 (35%)Paralogue-speci/f_ic, e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'or ganism-speci/f_ic phosphorylation sites 17 (4%) Neutral Selectivity Gs interface3 (12%) 6 (24%) 16 (64%)1 1. Key contacts for fold/stabilityb a cd L160 2. Core  /uni03B2/uni03B3 and  effector interface3. Nucleotide-binding site and domain hinge re gion2 /uni03B2/uni03B33 Conserved Figure 3 | Subtype-specific residues and G  selectivity barcode.   a, Comparing the G-protein paralogue alignment with the respective  orthologue alignment can disentangle positions involved in shared  function (magenta), subtype-specific function (cyan), organism-specific  function (white) and those under relaxed functional constraint (beige).  b, Mapping the data onto the GDP-bound conformation of a G  i protein  (Protein Data Bank (PDB) accession number 1GP2). c , Mapping the data onto the G  s-protein  2AR interface (PDB accession number 3SN6;      not shown). The numbers of residues in each group (  2ARG  s  protein interface positions) are shown in the pie chart. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 3, 'content': 'd , For the inferred  G-protein interface positions (CGN system22), the consensus sequence  and the nature of the position (conserved, neutral, selective) are shown for  each G protein (G   selectivity barcode).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'article reSearcH320 | N aTURE | VOL 545 | 18 may 2017the same G protein is indicative of whether the selectivity-determining   positions on the receptors are likely to be similar or different. By mapping the G-protein coupling data (primary and secondary  coupling) onto the phylogenetic tree of human GPCRs, we observed  that members of the GPCR subfamily have rewired G   coupling  selectivity from their respective common ancestors on numerous  occasions (Fig. 5c, Extended Data Fig. 8 and Supplementary Data).  Through reconstruction of ancestral coupling selectivity, we conser - vatively estimate that ~  85% of the receptors altered their G   selec - tivity at least once during their evolutionary history (Supplementary  Data). Consistent with the evolutionary scenario, we did not observe  a common sequence pattern in receptors from different families  that couple to the same G   proteins, which is in line with previ - ous studies13. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Thus, the receptor selectivity determinants are more  complex and dynamic, which contrasts with the evolutionarily static  G  selectivity barcode. This could also explain why previous studies  could only find selectivity patterns for certain related members of a  receptor subfamily12,30 (see Supplementary Table 1 for a collection of previous studies), but never a universal sequence pattern for the  different receptors. Revealing receptor selectivity signatures Using GPCRdb residue numbering4, we identified 33 receptor positions  that contact G   by analysing the   2ARG  s, A2A receptormini G  s  and rhodopsinG  t peptide structures. To consider variations due to  receptor conformational dynamics, varying degrees of rotation and  translation of H5 of G   between different G-protein subtypes upon  receptor binding, side-chain differences, and basal activity, we identi - fied six additional positions that are proximal and face the G protein  and thereby could participate in mediating a contact. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The importance  of these positions is independently supported by several biochemical  studies aimed at understanding selectivity in a few receptors and G  proteins (Supplementary Table 1). Consistent with the structural data,  the second and third intracellular loop regions of receptors are most  frequently associated with the effect of altering coupling selectivity. Restricting the analysis to these positions did not reveal any common  pattern in terms of the sequence or amino-acid properties that are con - served in all GPCRs known to couple to the same G protein ( Extended  Data Fig. 9a). However, we did observe signatures of amino-acid prop - erties at interface positions between evolutionarily related receptors   that couple to the same G protein (Methods and Extended Data   Fig. 9b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'For each of the aminergic, V2R-related, S1P-related, puriner - gic and chemokine receptor groups, we observed distinct signatures  in the interface positions among the subset of closely related recep - tors that can bind a given G   family compared with those in the same  group that cannot (Extended Data Fig. 9b). The selectivity signatures  are largely different for the receptor groups, highlighting the fact that  receptors from different groups arrived at independent solutions  to bind the same G protein. Notably, strong signals appear in ICL2,  TM3, TM57 and H8, and are most frequent in ICL2 and rare in TM3.  This suggests that, by comparing interface positions among groups of related receptors with different coupling properties, it is possible  to pinpoint individual positions at the receptor interface that are not  only conserved, but also involved in recognizing the G   protein. For  instance, vasopressin 2 receptor (V2R) and   2AR (which belong to  different subfamilies) both couple to G s and have complex evolu - tionary histories (Extended Data Fig. 8). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'An analysis of the equivalent  interface positions on the receptors that contact the G  s protein shows  that V2R independently accumulated a different set of mutations in  the same region to selectively couple to G  s and hence arrived at a   different sequence pattern to read the same G   protein selectivity barcode   (Fig. 5d; see Extended Data Fig. 9c for an additional example involving  V2R and adenosine receptors). Thus, to understand the receptor binding determinants, it is critical   to reconstruct the evolutionary history and investigate the interface  positions in the different receptor subtypes. To aid researchers to apply  the principles described in this work on any G protein or receptor   of interest, we have developed a comprehensive and interactive web  resource in GPCRdb31 (top menu item Signal Proteins at http://www. gpcrdb.org; Extended Data Fig. 10 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The features provided in the  resource, which will be continuously updated, should serve as a guide  for biologists interested in uncovering the interface determinants of  coupling selectivity for various applications (for example, protein engi - neering and structural studies) and understanding the consequences  of mutations (for example, natural variation and disease mutations) in  individual receptors. Discussion The mechanism of achieving selectivity has a striking analogy where  GPCRs are keys, and the G proteins are locks that open different doors  (denoting signalling pathways; Fig. 6). Master keys open many doors  (that is, promiscuous GPCRs such as GPR4, Lpar4), and specific keys  open a single door (for example, chemokine and odorant receptors). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 4, 'content': ' This information is encoded in the design of the cuts of the keys (that  90 90GPCR G protein ICL2 ICL2 TM5 extension TM5 extension ICL3 ICL3 DRY DRY TM6 TM6 H5-N-terminus HN, S1/3 H5-N-terminus HN, S2/3H5-C-terminus H4 H4 H5/H4 H5/H4H5-C-terminusb Ridges Groovesa cG-protein interface positions 3 4 17 /uni03B22ARGsA2ARGsGPCR interface positions 3 6 18 /uni03B22ARGsA2ARGs12 14 29 /uni03B22ARGsA2ARGsNumber of r esidue contactsGPCR ICL2 GPCR DRY GPCR TM6GPCR TM5 extension GPCR ICL3 G-protein H4 G-protein H4, H5G-protein H5- C-terminus G-protein HN, S 1/3, H5- N-terminus Figure 4 | Residue contacts at the GPCRG-protein interface.   a, Left: residue contact network of all residues at the   2ARG  s protein  interface (PDB accession number 3SN6). Residues in the different clusters  (Methods) are shown in red, blue, green, brown and yellow. Right: meta- network highlighting the connectivity between the clusters. Node size  reflects number of amino acids in the cluster, and edge weight denotes number of residue contacts between clusters. b , Mapping the structure- derived interface clusters shows complementary ridges and grooves at the receptorG-protein interface. c , Comparison of residues and residue  contacts shared between the    2ARG  s and A 2Amini G  s structures  (Extended Data Fig. 7).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'article reSearcH18 may 2017 | VOL 545 | N aTURE | 321is, patterns of grooves and ridges; GPCRG-protein interface). There  are different solutions for designing keys that open the same lock by  leaving out or including ridges in different combinations. This is seen  in GPCRs from distinct subfamilies, where different interface posi - tions are subjected to positive and negative discrimination around a conserved core to couple to specific G proteins. Where there are   typically many more keys (receptors) than doors, the patterns on the lock   (G protein) are under higher constraint than the individual keys   themselves. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This asymmetry in constraints is seen in the GPCRG- protein signalling system, which manifests in a stronger evolutionary c bR0 G/uni03B1s R2/uni2032 G/uni03B1iR1 G/uni03B1s R1/uni2032 G/uni03B1sR2 G/uni03B1sR3 G/uni03B1i R3/uni2032 G/uni03B1iLikely different solution  for bindingsame G protein Inherited solution for binding same G pr oteinInherited solution for binding same G pr otein Ligand-binding diversi/f_ication G-pr otein-binding diversi/f_icationGPCR duplicationG-pr otein-binding diversi/f_ication Ligand-binding diversi/f_ication Ancestral GPCR R3/uni2032GiR2/uni2032GiR1/uni2032GsR1GsR2GsR3Gi Ligand diversi/f_icationG-protein diversi/f_ication Ligand diversi/f_icationG-protein diversi/f_icationancestral GPCRR0Gs Inherited solution for binding same G pr oteinInherited solution for binding same G pr otein Likely dif ferent solution  fo r binding same G pr otein Solution = pattern  of amino acid at GPCR interface positions AVPR2AVPR1AAVPR1BGsGi/oClass Gq/11G12/13Probability of ancestral G-protein coupling 0.00.20.40.60.81.0 GsGi/oGq/11G12/13Ancestral reconstructiona  GsGi/oGq/11 G12/13TACR2 GPR158SSTR2EDNRA ADGRG3ADRA1B ADGRL4 ACKR4PTGER3ADORA2B CCR8TSHR GPR156GPR162 NTSR2 GPR139CCR2GPR98GPBAR1 NMBR GPRC5CPROKR2 F2RL3PRLHR TAS2R14NPFFR1 MRGPRX1HCRTR1DRD 1 GPR3 4OPRD1 GP R146MCHR1CHRM 1PTGDR CYSLTR1MCHR2CELSR2 MRGPRX4 CD97 GPR149GPR84 C3AR1OPN1LWAD', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This asymmetry in constraints is seen in the GPCRG- protein signalling system, which manifests in a stronger evolutionary c bR0 G/uni03B1s R2/uni2032 G/uni03B1iR1 G/uni03B1s R1/uni2032 G/uni03B1sR2 G/uni03B1sR3 G/uni03B1i R3/uni2032 G/uni03B1iLikely different solution  for bindingsame G protein Inherited solution for binding same G pr oteinInherited solution for binding sRA 2BGPR52 GPR62S1PR3 LPAR6AVPR2MRGPRX3GPR63 CMKLR1ADGRA1GPR78 HCAR3EDNRBADO RA3 CX3CR1 P2RY2RXFP1 CYSLT R2LGR4HTR7 BRS3NPFFR2AD ORA2 A MRGPRD GPER1S1PR4 CCR 5MC2R GPR141RXF P4GPRC5B GPR42GRM4MTNR1A DRD5HRH1GPR61 BDK RB1VIPR1 F2RL1NPY6R GPR2 0NTSR1M C4R HCRTR2 CXCR1 TAS2R38OPRK1 CRHR2GPR119 TAAR1 FF AR2ADR A2C OPRL1 TAS2R13ADRA1DM C5R CHRM2HRH3 CCR 1 TAS2R40 TAS2R7MRGPRX2 GPR35PTGDR2DRD4 LGR6MC 3RLP AR 2 MAS1GPR85 SSTR5CH RM 3DRD3 AVPR1BGPRC5AADGRG2GPR161 PTH1RVIPR2TAAR9 GPR17 P2RY11ADRB1OPN5 HT R1FGPR19 BDKRB2CRHR1GPR151 GPR174CCR7 XCR1GALR1ACKR1 F2RL 2TAS2R16OPRM1 MAS1L AGT R2 TAS2R39ADGRE1SSTR1 GPRC6A TAS2R5CCKBR NPBWR2 GPR65CCR9GPR33 HCAR2DRD2 GLP2R ADGRF1 OXGR1TAAR2TACR3CNR2 P2RY14CASRADGRG4ADGRL3 OXTR NMUR1TAS2R9 FF AR 3GPR153 LGR5 CCR4ADGRF3CHR M5 PTH2RGPR37L1 GPR152PTGER2 TBXA2RS1PR5 RXFP2 QRFPR TAS2R43GPR27 LPAR4GPR32HTR1E GP R87GLP1RGP R6 GP R2 5 GPR183GALR3CCKAR ADGR D2 FPR3NPBWR1 TAS2R4ACKR3 TAS2R30TAS1R3 TAS2R41CCRL2ADGRE4PSSTR4 GRM2KISS1RM C1R HTR 2B MLNRADGRF4CHRM4ADRA 1', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This asymmetry in constraints is seen in the GPCRG- protein signalling system, which manifests in a stronger evolutionary c bR0 G/uni03B1s R2/uni2032 G/uni03B1iR1 G/uni03B1s R1/uni2032 G/uni03B1sR2 G/uni03B1sR3 G/uni03B1i R3/uni2032 G/uni03B1iLikely different solution  for bindingsame G protein Inherited solution for binding same G pr oteinInherited solution for binding sA HRH 4 P2R Y13FFAR4 AVPR1ATAAR6 GPR68GRM6PROKR1 ADGRL2HTR4 GNRHRGPR176 ADGRD1GPR83 GPR171GRM5 RXFP3PTGER1 GPR1 8ADRB 2CNR1 GCGRGPR50 GPR173 GPR135 OPN4 GALR2GPR21 CALCRL GPRC5DADCYAP1R1PTGFR TAAR5RRH P2 RY1P2RY12 GPR 31CCR6 GPR15NPY5RHT R1 A GPR179 TAS2R60 TAS2R3FSHR LTB4R GPR39TAS2R10 P2RY8HTR2 C SCTR SSTR3 GRM8 TAS2R20ADGRF2GIPR MRGPRG TRHRCXCR3 GPR132AGTR1GPR182 HCAR1HRH2 LPAR5ADGRA2 P2RY10GP R55GPR45S1PR 2 F2RNPY4R CELSR3 TAS2R1FPR2GPR148 GPR75 TAS2R31S1PR1 ADR B3 CXCR5 GRM1HT R1 D TAS2R42AP LNRLHCGR GPR160 P2RY4GPR8 2C5AR1ADGRF5PTGIR TAS1R2ADGRB2 FPR1LPA R1 UTS2R MRGPRF TAS2R50TAAR3 GHRHR ACKR2OPN3 CCR3HT R1B NPY2RTACR1 NPSR1 FFAR1GPR26 ADGRE2GPR37GPR1 2 GPR 4TAAR8MTNR1BLPAR3 CALCR TAS2R8HTR6 TAS2R46GPR56 CXCR6ADGRG5 SU CNR1GHSRGABBR2CCR10 GRM7 GPR142GRM3TAS1R1 PTAFRAD RA 2A CXCR2C5AR2GNRHR2NPY1R MRGPRECELSR1PTGER4 LTB4R2 CXCR4 P2R Y6ADORA1 HTR5AGPR88 GRPR GPR150 OXER1HT R2A GPR22GPR101GPR3 TAS2R19 NMUR2ADGRE3 GPR1 Class A                                                     Class', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This asymmetry in constraints is seen in the GPCRG- protein signalling system, which manifests in a stronger evolutionary c bR0 G/uni03B1s R2/uni2032 G/uni03B1iR1 G/uni03B1s R1/uni2032 G/uni03B1sR2 G/uni03B1sR3 G/uni03B1i R3/uni2032 G/uni03B1iLikely different solution  for bindingsame G protein Inherited solution for binding same G pr oteinInherited solution for binding s B                           Class C d Hydrogen bondingAliphatic hydrophobic AromaticS mallPositive chargeNegative chargeConsensus Aminer gic-G/uni03B1s speci/f_ic70\x16, &/\x15 70\x18\x03\x0e\x03H[WHQVLRQ 70\x19 70\x1a7 0\x1b 3 50 505152 7172 5354 5655 5354 5657 55 5655 7475 61646566 6869 67 51 4849 47 33363740 2526 2932 283333 555555555 666666666778888 55 343 4343 4343 4343 4 V2R-G/uni03B1s speci/f_ic Figure 5 | Evolutionary history of GPCRs and selectivity-determining  positions on the receptor. a , Gene duplication model for the evolution  of ligand and G-protein selectivity of GPCRs. b, Phylogenetic tree  representation of the events in the gene duplication model. c, A phylogenetic   tree of human class A, B and C GPCRs showing the G-protein coupling  selectivity of each GPCR (Extended Data Fig. 8). The four dots (filled or empty) depict both primary and secondary G-protein coupling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'G-protein  coupling of each ancestral node was reconstructed by considering the primary coupling of the receptors (V2R clade receptors shown as  example). d, Sequence pattern (Methods) of the aminergic and V2R-clade  interface positions suggests that the receptors accumulated mutations independently at different positions to couple to G   s. Various single   point mutations in the V2 receptor (no structure available) support the idea that several of these positions are crucial for selectivity (Supplementary Table 1). Figure 6 | Lock and key analogy for GPCRG-protein selectivity.    a, Receptors are analogous to keys and G proteins are analogous to locks  on doors (signalling pathways). b , Members of different GPCR families  can find distinct solutions to bind the same G protein. The conserved  core of the interface (magenta) allows for a common binding mode and  activation mechanism, while specificity/selectivity is achieved through interaction with some parts of the family-specific G-protein barcode residues (cyan). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'c , Some GPCRs can be promiscuous (master keys)   and interact with multiple G proteins (that is, open multiple locks).   d, G-protein interfaces are more static (fixed lock) whereas the GPCR  interfaces are more dynamic during evolution. Positive and negative design of the receptor interface positions through mutations may give  rise to specificity (that is, adjusting the cuts of keys so that they only  open certain locks but not others). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 5, 'content': 'e , Other factors can modify the GPCR  interface and binding selectivity.Positive designReceptor G/uni03B1 pr otein  Positive design Negative design Negative designR* G/uni03B1 D1 receptor D1 receptor D2 receptor M1 receptor D2 receptor G/uni03B1sG/uni03B1sG/uni03B1i/oG/uni03B1sG/uni03B1qG/uni03B1i/oab c e dSame re ceptor (key) activates many G pr oteins (locks) G/uni03B1sG/uni03B1i/o/uni03B22AR G/uni03B1s5-HT6/uni03B21ARDifferent receptors (keys) activate same G pr otein (lock)An expanded lock and key analogy Positive and negative design of interface r esidues confer selectivity Other mechanisms that can in/f_luence binding Non-interface re sidues af fecting re ceptor dynamics  or ligand-biased conformations, post-translational  modi/f_ications, altern ative splicing, etc ...  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'article reSearcH322 | N aTURE | VOL 545 | 18 may 2017signal for selectivity-determining positions on G   proteins compared  with the receptors. Receptors with different phylogenetic history might use different sets  of residues to read distinct parts of the same G   selectivity barcode.   This combinatorial possibility makes the interface robust to muta - tions and might facilitate evolvability and fine-tuning of selectivity.   While the interface chemistry provides a basis for coupling, the relative  expression levels of the receptor or G  , kinetic scaffolding, intrinsic  nucleotide hydrolysis rates of G  , pre-coupling, post-translational  modifications, alternative splicing, RNA editing, and phospholipid  and membrane composition can all modulate, fine-tune, alter or  even switch selectivity in different contexts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Furthermore, receptor   oligomerization, conformational dynamics, basal activity and  ligand-induced changes (functional selectivity) can alter binding and  selectivity32,33. Therefore, positions and residues that are not at the  interface34, but which can influence any of these factors, can also affect  G-protein selectivity. From an evolutionary perspective, the asymmetry between the pres - entation of a rigid G   barcode and its flexible interpretation by the  receptor through a large number of possibilities could have aided the  extensive expansion of receptors in different organisms. Such a design  of interaction interface could have facilitated the rapid evolution of  the GPCR signalling system and contributed to organismal complexity  by allowing cells to respond to different stimuli, thereby permitting  adaptation to diverse environments. Future studies aimed at providing   quantitative understanding of the sequence-dependent binding of  receptorG   interaction may unravel the extent of lineage-specific  differences in coupling selectivity and may point to fundamental   differences in signalling between different organisms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and  Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to  these sections appear only in the online paper. received 13 June 2016; accepted 14 March 2017.  Published online 10 May 2017. 1. Bjarnadttir, T. K. et al. Comprehensive repertoire and phylogenetic analysis of  the G protein-coupled receptors in human and mouse. Genomics 88, 263273  (2006). 2. Anantharaman, V., Abhiman, S., de Souza, R. F. & Aravind, L. Comparative genomics uncovers novel structural and functional features of the heterotrimeric GTPase signaling system. Gene 475, 6378 (2011). 3. Southan, C. et al. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2016: towards curated quantitative interactions between 1300 protein targets and 6000 ligands. Nucleic Acids Res. 44 (D1), D1054D1068 (2016). 4. Isberg, V. et al. Generic GPCR residue numbersaligning topology maps while minding the gaps. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 36, 2231 (2015). 5. Neves, S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'R., Ram, P. T. & Iyengar, R. G protein pathways. Science 296,  16361639 (2002). 6. Marinissen, M. J. & Gutkind, J. S. G-protein-coupled receptors and signaling networks: emerging paradigms. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 22, 368376 (2001). 7. Oldham, W. M. & Hamm, H. E. Heterotrimeric G protein activation by  G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 6071 (2008). 8. Frielle, T. et al. Cloning of the cDNA for the human  1-adrenergic receptor.   Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 84, 79207924 (1987). 9. Ruat, M. et al. A novel rat serotonin (5-HT6) receptor: molecular cloning, localization and stimulation of cAMP accumulation. Biochem. Biophys. Res.  Commun. 193, 268276 (1993). 10. Li, F., De Godoy, M. & Rattan, S. Role of adenylate and guanylate cyclases in     1-,  2-, and   3-adrenoceptor-mediated relaxation of internal anal sphincter  smooth muscle. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 308, 11111120 (2004). 11. Wess, J. Molecular basis of receptor/G-protein-coupling selectivity. Pharmacol. Ther. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': '80, 231264 (1998). 12. Horn, F., van der Wenden, E. M., Oliveira, L., IJzerman, A. P. & Vriend, G. Receptors coupling to G proteins: is there a signal behind the sequence?  Proteins 41, 448459 (2000). 13. Wong, S. K. G protein selectivity is regulated by multiple intracellular regions of  GPCRs. Neurosignals 12, 112 (2003). 14. Kruse, A. C. et al. Structure and dynamics of the M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. Nature 482, 552556 (2012). 15. Rasmussen, S. G. et al. Crystal structure of the    2 adrenergic receptorG s  protein complex. Nature 477, 549555 (2011).16. Carpenter, B., Nehm, R., Warne, T., Leslie, A. G. & Tate, C. G. Structure of the adenosine A 2A receptor bound to an engineered G protein. Nature 536,  104107 (2016). 17. Masuho I. et al. Distinct profiles of functional discrimination among G proteins determine the actions of G protein-coupled receptors. Sci. Signal. 8, ra123  (2015). 18. Krishnan, A. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Evolutionary hierarchy of vertebrate-like heterotrimeric G  protein families. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 91, 2740 (2015). 19. de Mendoza, A., Seb-Pedrs, A. & Ruiz-Trillo, I. The evolution of the GPCR  signaling system in eukaryotes: modularity, conservation, and the transition    to metazoan multicellularity. Genome Biol. Evol. 6, 606619 (2014). 20. Krishnan, A., Almn, M. S., Fredriksson, R. & Schith, H. B. The origin of GPCRs:  identification of mammalian like Rhodopsin, Adhesion, Glutamate and Frizzled   GPCRs in fungi. PLoS ONE 7, e29817 (2012). 21. Mirny, L. A. & Gelfand, M. S. Using orthologous and paralogous proteins to  identify specificity determining residues. Genome Biol. 3, http://dx.doi. org/10.1186/gb-2002-3-3-preprint0002 (2002). 22. Flock, T. et al. Universal allosteric mechanism for G   activation by GPCRs.  Nature 524, 173179 (2015). 23. Sun, D. et al. Probing G  i1 protein activation at single-amino acid resolution.  Nature Struct. Mol. Biol. 22, 686694 (2015). 24. Conklin, B. R., Farfel, Z., Lustig, K. D., Julius, D. & Bourne, H. R. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Substitution of  three amino acids switches receptor specificity of G q  to that of G i . Nature   363, 274276 (1993). 25. Komatsuzaki, K. et al. A novel system that reports the G-proteins linked to a  given receptor: a study of type 3 somatostatin receptor. FEBS Lett. 406,  165170 (1997). 26. Sasamura, H. et al. Analysis of G   protein recognition profiles of angiotensin II  receptors using chimeric G   proteins. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 170, 113121  (2000). 27. Janin, J. & Chothia, C. The structure of protein-protein recognition sites.   J. Biol. Chem. 265, 1602716030 (1990). 28. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. et al. Molecular signatures of G-protein-coupled  receptors. Nature 494, 185194 (2013). 29. Reichmann, D. et al. The modular architecture of protein-protein binding  interfaces. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 5762 (2005). 30. Kleinau, G. et al. Principles and determinants of G-protein coupling by the  rhodopsin-like thyrotropin receptor. PLoS ONE 5, e9745 (2010). 31. Isberg, V. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'GPCRdb: an information system for G protein-coupled  receptors. Nucleic Acids Res. 44 (D1), D356D364 (2016). 32. Furness, S. G. et al. Ligand-dependent modulation of G protein conformation alters drug efficacy. Cell 167, 739749 (2016). 33. Rose, A. S. et al. Position of transmembrane helix 6 determines receptor    G protein coupling specificity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 1124411247   (2014). 34. Wichard, J. D. et al. Chemogenomic analysis of G-protein coupled receptors  and their ligands deciphers locks and keys governing diverse aspects of  signalling. PLoS ONE 6, e16811 (2011). Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper . Acknowledgements We thank U. F. Lang, D. Veprintsev, C. Ravarani,   H. Harbrecht, G. De Baets, D. Prado, X. Deupi, C. G. Tate and N. S. Latysheva   for their comments on this work, and J. Westmoreland for assistance with   Fig. 6. We thank S. Chavali and B. Lang for help with compiling mutation and   expression data. We thank M. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Mounir and C. Munk for help with the GPCRdb   web service. This work was supported by the Medical Research Council   (MC_U105185859; M.M.B., T.F., S.B.), the Boehringer Ingelheim Fond (T.F.),  European Research Council (DE-ORPHAN 639125; D.E.G., A.S.H., N.L.) and the  Lundbeck Foundation (R163-2013-16327; D.E.G.). T.F. is a Research Fellow of Fitzwilliam College, University of Cambridge, UK. M.M.B. is a Lister Institute Research Prize Fellow and is supported by a European Research Council  Consolidator Grant. Author Contributions T.F. and M.M.B. designed the project, analysed the data,  interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript, with inputs from all authors.  T.F. collected data, wrote scripts and performed all the analyses. S.B. performed orthologue detection, receptor alignment, tree building and ancestral reconstruction with help from T.F.; D.E.G., N.L. and A.S.H. performed the   analysis on GPCR sequence patterns, and developed the web services.   M.M.B. supervised the project. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at  www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper .  Publishers note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional  claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Correspondence and  requests for materials should be addressed to T.F. (tf284@cam.ac.uk) or M.M.B. (madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk). reviewer Information Nature thanks M. Lassig, A. B. Tobin and the other  anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'article reSearcHMethOdS No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments  were not randomized. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during  experiments and outcome assessment. Phylogenetic analysis of GPCR and G-protein repertoires. Determination of  GPCR and G-protein repertoires. The set of 394 annotated human non-olfactory   GPCRs was obtained from the International Union of Basic and Clinical  Pharmacology/British Pharmacological Society (IUPHAR/BPS) Guide to  Pharmacology database (December 2014)35. The full repertoires of GPCRs and  G proteins across 13 different organisms that serve as model organisms for the  major animal lineages was determined through identification of relevant seven-   transmembrane helix domain families from Pfam36 (see Supplementary Data  for the full list of Pfam families). The organisms were H. sapiens, M. musculus,   G. gallus, X. tropicalis , D. rerio, B. floridae , S. purpuratus , D. melanogaster,   C. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'elegans, N. vectensis, T. adhaerens, C. owczarzaki and M. brevicollis . To obtain  the number of unique GPCRs and G proteins in each organism, protein sequences  were retrieved through the Pfam Application Programming Interface (API) and  subsequently mapped to their unique gene identifiers using UniProt37. Olfactory,  taste and odorant receptors were identified through distinct sequence profiles from  Pfam. We compared the patterns in the alignments of all known human olfactory  receptors and other human class A receptors using Spial38. The gene numbers  provided here offer an update to previous estimates of the GPCR repertoire in  some of these organisms2,18,39. Determination of sequence relationships of GPCR and G proteins across dif - ferent organisms. Phylogenetic relationships and orthologous sequences were collected from the Orthologous MAtrix (OMA) database 40 and  EnsemblComparaGeneTrees (Compara)41 using R and Python scripts written   in-house. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Two independent approaches were used to identify phylogenetic   relationships: (1) a stringent definition of orthology as used in OMA and (2) using  a bi-directional best-hit method implemented using Jackhmmer42. For OMA   orthologues, a Python script using the OMA SOAP API (12 July 2015, database ver - sion September 2014)40 and Compara database41 was used to obtain phylogenetic   relationships. OMA had orthologue data for 361 human GPCRs; a list of missing receptors is given as Supplementary Data. For the Jackhmmer orthologues, a Perl  script was written to identify the best hits between sequences from the reper - toires of the 13 different organisms. Using both measures allowed us to ensure  that the general trend of diversification of the GPCR repertoire, compared with  the G-protein repertoire reported in the paper, was independent of the method  used to detect phylogenetic relationships between sequences. Calculation of a modified Jaccard similarity index. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'We computed the Jaccard  similarity index (range 01), defined as the number of conserved genes   (overlapping) divided by the total number of genes that code for GPCRs or    G  proteins, respectively. To identify the overlap of the GPCR and G-protein   repertoires in different organisms, genes in different organisms were annotated as  having a phylogenetic relationship if they had a hit in the human/organism reper - toire with Jackhmmer (this included many-to-one orthologues and hence multiple  proteins being related to the same protein in the other organism, to account for  gene expansion events). A high value (closer to 1) means that the two organisms  largely share the GPCR/G-protein repertoire. A lower value (closer to 0) means  that the repertoires are more distinct. The observation that the modified Jaccard  similarity index is higher for N. vectensis  and T. adhaerens than D. melanogaster and  C. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'elegans reflects the fact43,44 that the common ancestor had a complex repertoire  of GPCRs and G proteins, which were independently lost in the nematode and  insect lineages. Similarly, the large number of distinct sequences in the different  organisms for which orthologues do not exist in humans suggests that each lineage  has independently undergone expansion of the GPCR repertoire through gene  duplication events. Determination of an approximate phylogenetic age of human GPCRs and   G proteins. To extend the repertoire analysis of 13 key organisms, GPCR and  G-protein homologues from 215 organisms were analysed using the OMA API40.  To estimate the age of every human GPCR and G-protein gene, the age of each  of the 215 organisms was determined by extracting the branch length to humans  from the OMA species tree using the R package ape45. The oldest (longest branch  length to human) organism that had an orthologue to the human GPCR or G  protein was used for the age estimation of each gene. Both definitions of orthology   (1:1 orthology and any type of orthology) were used (see Extended Data Fig. 4a). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Identification of G-protein selectivity barcode.  Construction of G  protein par - alogue alignment. The human G   protein paralogue alignment and the 16 G   protein orthologue alignments were constructed as described previously in ref. 22.  Briefly, all relevant human G   protein isoforms and variants were obtained from  Ensembl41 using R. The canonical protein sequences for each of the 16 human  G  genes, as defined by UniProt37, were used as representative sequences for each human G   gene. The sequences were aligned using Muscle (http://www.drive5. com/muscle/) and were manually refined using the consensus secondary structure  as a guide. The alignments of orthologues for each of the 16 trees, ordered by the  species tree, are available as Supplementary Data. This can be visualized using  standard sequence alignment software tools to infer when a particular position  was fixed during organismal evolution. Orthologue alignments of one-to-one G   orthologues of 16 human G   genes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': ' Phylogenetic relationships of G   sequences were collected from TreeFam46, the  OMA database40 and Compara41 using R scripts. Compara had the highest fraction  of complete G   sequences for each human G   gene, except for G   proteins for  which OMA had a better sequence coverage. In total, 973 genes from 66 organ - isms were used, of which 773 were one-to-one orthologues. To build an accurate,   low-gap alignment of such a large number of sequences, 16 independent orthologous   alignments for each human G   gene were first created by aligning one-to-one  orthologue groups using the PCMA algorithm47 followed by manual refinement.  Subsequently, each orthologue alignment was cross-referenced to the CGN   system22 by referencing its respective human sequence to the human paralogue  alignment. Inferring positions under different functional constraints in G proteins . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'For each of  the 16 human G proteins, the orthologue alignment was obtained (see above) and  the sequence identity for every position in the alignment (CGN system) was com - puted. The sequence identity of each position in the 16 human G   protein para- logue alignments was also computed. For each of the 16 G   protein paralogues,  the sequence identity of the orthologue alignment was plotted against the human  paralogue alignment (Extended Data Fig. 5a). To infer positions that are under  differential functional constraints (Fig. 3a; highly conserved residues, subtype-   specifically conserved, neutrally evolving residues and paralogue specifically   conserved positions)21 for a G , the 16 G   orthologue alignments were first  cross-referenced to the paralogue alignment using the CGN system. Here, we used  a conservative cut-off (Supplementary Data; the user has an option to change the  cut-offs to identify such positions in any G protein through the GPCRdb resource;  for example, for GNAS2 see http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/gnas2_human/). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'This  led to the identification of residue positions in the alignment for each of the 16 G  proteins that are (1) conserved in paralogues and orthologues of a subtype (uni - versally conserved position; at least 80% conservation among the orthologues and  the paralogues), (2) conserved among the orthologues of a G   subtype but variable  among the human paralogues (selectivity-determining residue; 80% conservation  among the orthologues but less than 80% conservation among the paralogues),  (3) variable among the orthologue and paralogue alignments (neutrally evolving  positions; less than 80% among orthologues and less than 80% among paralogues),  or (4) conserved in the paralogue alignment but not in the orthologue alignment  (speciesspecific positions; more than 80% conservation among the human par - alogues but less than 80% among the respective orthologues). For G 15 in Fig. 3d ,  position G.H5.25 is shown as leucine (L) since the conservation was close to the  80% cut-off and was either a valine (V) or isoleucine (I) in the homologues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'In  addition to the GPCRdb web service, we also provide pre-computed barcodes  using different cut-offs as Supplementary Data. We also used a multi-dimensional scaling approach (hierarchical clustering) to  map the orthologue/paralogue conservation scores for each of the 16 G proteins  onto a single prototypical G protein. For every CGN position in the alignment,  a 17-dimension vector was computed, where the value of the first 16 dimensions  denoted the percentage conservation of that position among the orthologues for  each G protein. The value of the last dimension denoted the percentage conserva - tion of that position among the human G-protein paralogues. Through hierarchi - cal clustering (dissimilarity measure Pearson correlation with complete linkage),  the above-mentioned conservation types were determined without relying on  conservation cut-offs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'This cut-off free approach revealed the existence of CGN  positions that (1) evolved in a neutral manner, (2) evolved in a subtype-specific  manner and (3) were conserved (Supplementary Figure). However, the mapping  of this information based on the CGN position (that is, to a single prototypical  G protein) meant that all the 16 G-protein members had the same number of  positions that were selectivity-determining, conserved or neutrally evolving. To  account for variation in the number of such sites between the different G-protein  members, we present the barcode in Fig. 3d using conservative cut-offs described  above. As it is not possible to identify a single cut-off to differentiate such positions,  we provide readers/users with the opportunity to choose their own cut-offs in the  GPCRdb web resource for identifying such positions for each of the 16 G   proteins  (for example, for GNAS2 http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/gnas2_human/). In this  manner, researchers can be liberal or conservative in inferring such positions in  any human G   protein of interest. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Identification of G-protein positions and GPCR positions that mediate binding at  the interface . The inter-GPCRG-protein residue contact network was computed   2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'article reSearcHfor the   2ARG  s (PDB accession number 3SN6), A 2Amini G  s (PDB accession  number 5G53) and rhodopsin-G  t-C-peptide (PDB accession numbers 2X72,  3DQB, 3PQR, 4A4M) structures using van der Waals contacts between atoms,  as described in ref. 28. By using the CGN system22 and the GPCRdb numbering  scheme31, we identified 25 CGN positions and 34 GPCR positions that partici - pate in non-covalent contacts at the interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'To identify positions near the inter - face that may influence binding (potential pre-coupling sites on G proteins and  G-protein accessible sites on receptors), we adopted the following strategy: for the  pre-coupling sites, we first identified surface-accessible CGN positions on the G  domain of the G   protein (inferred using the inactive, GDP-bound G   structure;  PDB accession number 1GP2) that were subtype specifically conserved and that  did not map to    -, nucleotide- or effector-binding positions, but were known to  experimentally affect receptor binding. For this, we computed the residue contact  networks for all available structures (over 50 structure) of G   proteins bound  to the nucleotide,     and different effectors and annotated every CGN position  (that is, whether they interacted with    -, nucleotide- or effector). For positions  known to affect receptor binding, we made use of the quantitative experimental  data on G  i binding to rhodopsin upon mutating every residue to alanine23. This  master table (Supplementary Data) allowed us to identify a further four sites that  might constitute potential pre-coupling sites. To consider variations due to receptor  conformational dynamics, side-chain differences and basal activity, we identified  G-protein accessible sites on the receptor. These were identified as six additional  positions that are proximal (5  distance) and face the G protein and thereby could  participate in mediating the interaction. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Mapping of selectivity barcode onto G-protein structure and alignment visualization.  The role of every position on G   proteins was mapped onto the protein structure  using customised R scripts and PyMol (colour code: magenta for highly con - served; cyan for selectively conserved in G   proteins; beige for neutral evolving).   The consensus sequence of each orthologue and the paralogue alignment was  determined and displayed in an alignment of consensus sequences for the   identified G   interface positions for all the 16 protein families, which was used for  visualization of the barcode ( Fig. 3d). The accessible surface area of PDB acces - sion number 1GP2 (G  i) was obtained from the PDBe PISA (Proteins, Interfaces,  Structures, and Assemblies)48 XML repository and normalized by the accessible  surface area for each residue position49 to obtain the relative accessible surface area  for each residue. The boxplot (Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': '5b) was created with ggplot2 and  the significance level (given as P  values) was determined using the non-parametric  MannWhitney test. Characterization of GPCRG-protein interface.  Non-covalent contact and   network analysis . The inter-GPCRG-protein residue contact network for the    2ARG  s (PDB accession number 3SN6) and A 2Amini G  s (PDB accession  number 5G53) structures was computed using van der Waals contacts between  atoms, as described in ref. 28. For two-dimensional visualization, the residue con - tact network of  2ARG  s was exported to Cytoscape50 using the RCytoscape  interface51. On the basis of a previous approach29, we determined connected  interface clusters from the inter-GPCRG-protein residue contact network by  applying the Glay community clustering algorithm52, which is implemented in  the Cytoscape through the plugin Cluster Maker53 (parameters: undirected edges). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': ' To test the robustness of the clustering approach, clustering was repeated using   different edge weights (side-chain contacts only and weighting side-chain contacts  by factor of 2), which did not affect the overall organization of the identified clusters.   To generate the contact network between the different interface clusters, the sum  of all residue contacts between each cluster was calculated in R and visualized in  Cytoscape (Fig. 4a). For three-dimensional visualization of the clusters mapped  onto the three-dimensional network of the GPCRG-protein complex, custom - ised R scripts were used to create a residue contact network in PyMol by creating  pseudo-PDBs (Protein Data Bank file format) showing residues as spheres from  their C   atoms and lines/edges between them via the CONECT entries (using PDB  accession number 3SN6; Fig. 4a). Customised R scripts were written to integrate  the G-protein barcode (sequence analysis; Fig. 3) with the structural interface  clusters (  2ARG s structure analysis; Fig. 4a, b) on the basis of the CGN system  to generate Extended Data Fig. 6a. The node degree was determined with the  NetworkAnalyzer Plugin54 in Cytoscape50. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'For the comparison of the   2ARG  s   and the A 2Amini-G  s interface, the residue contact networks were compared  using the GPCRdb numbering for the receptor and the CGN for the G protein.  This allowed us to identify positions and contacts that were shared and unique for  the two complexes (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Phylogenetic tree of GPCRs and mapping of G-protein coupling data .  Phylogenetic tree of GPCRs. GPCR sequence alignment was constructed for each  GPCR class (A, B and C; defined in the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology  database; sequences retrieved through the IUPHAR API using a Python script).  Initial alignment within each class of GPCR was made using MSAProbs55, which was further manually adjusted using the GPCRdb numbering4 as a guide.  Furthermore, alignments within classes were trimmed by removing amino   (N)- and C-terminal overhanging residues and large insertion in ICL3 beyond the  first 1015 residues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'As a cross-class alignment was not straightforward owing to the  low sequence similarity across GPCR classes, a structure alignment of the highest-   resolution structure of each GPCR class was used to cross-align the individual  GPCR class alignments. The structure alignment was constructed using Mustang56  with 4EIY (aa2ar_human) and 4BVN (adrb1_melga) representing class A, 4K5Y  (crfr1_human) representing class B and 4OO9 (grm5_human) representing class C.  First, this structural alignment was integrated manually with the already-generated   class A GPCR alignment, and then sequentially class B and class C alignments were also integrated manually to get a cross-class super alignment . The cross- class super alignment was validated against a recent cross-GPCR-class structural  alignment4. Using the cross-class super alignment GPCR alignment, we first built  an approximate maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree using FastTree57, which  was used as initial starting tree for the final maximum-likelihood tree generation using MEGA7 (ref. 58). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Mapping of G-protein coupling data . G-protein coupling data and GPCR classi - fications were retrieved from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology (May 2016) 59 SQL database as described above. R was used to prepare the coupling  data for visualization as concentric circles in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 5c and  Extended Data Fig. 8) using the latest version of iTol (version 3)60. To investigate  sequence composition, sequence conservation and searching for physiochemical  and sequence pattern, the GPCR and G-protein alignments were analysed in R  using the bio3d61 and ape packages45. Phylogenetic reconstruction of G-protein coupling selectivity of ancestral GPCRs and  quantification of rewiring events . To reconstruct the most likely ancestral GPCR  coupling profile across all the clades of the final maximum-likelihood tree of  human GPCRs, the G  GPCR coupling data were mapped onto the cross-class  super alignment as described above Extended Data Fig. 8). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'We first created a   coupling profile for each receptor using the coupling information (from the IUPHAR database). The profile was a vector of four dimensions (G   s, G  i/o,   G q/11, G  12/13) that can take the value 1 (couples) or 0 (does not couple) in  each dimension. By considering this as the trait for each receptor, we integrated  the data with the final maximum- likelihood tree to generate ancestral coupling   probability values using BayesTraits version 2.059 (http://www.evolution.rdg.ac.uk/  BayesTraits.html). For each clade in the maximum-likelihood tree, we used the  monte-carlo simulation (mcmc) option with 100,000 trials in BayesTraits, to obtain  probabilities of ancestral coupling tendency for each of the four G   families. These  ancestral coupling probability values were converted into a binary format: that  is, 1 and 0 , where 1 indicated ancestral coupling to the given G protein and 0  indicated absence of such coupling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'We assigned the value 1 to the ancestral node  if the coupling probability was greater than or equal to 0.7. Otherwise we assigned  the value 0 . This information was then converted into a coupling profile for each  ancestral node in the tree, like the above-mentioned individual GPCR coupling  profiles. Then, for each GPCR, and the clade to which a given receptor belonged,  we required that (1) the clade should contain 30 or fewer GPCRs (so that we inves - tigated an ancestral receptor that was not very recent nor ancient) and (2) ancestral  coupling probability of the ancestral node as well individual receptors within the  clade had coupling information (that is, should not have all zeros in their profiles).  Through a custom-written Perl script, we traversed the maximum-likelihood tree.  We considered that a given GPCR had an altered coupling tendency compared  with that of one of its ancestral receptors if there was a mismatch in their coupling  profiles. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The number of such instances was recorded and used to infer the fraction  of receptors that had altered their coupling selectivity during their evolution. Receptor selectivity pattern identification . The aminergic, purinergic, chemokine,   S1P-related and V2R-related receptors (Extended Data Fig. 9) were selected  as representative evolutionarily related receptor groups. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The receptors in the   different groups included the following: (1) purinergic cluster: P2RY1, P2RY2,  P2RY4, P2RY6, P2RY11; (2) V2R-related cluster: V1bR, V1AR, V2R, OXYR,  NPSR1, GNRHR, PKR1, PKR2; (3) S1P-related cluster: CNR1, CNR2, LPAR1,  LPAR2, LPAR3, S1PR1, S1PR2, S1PR3, S1PR4, S1PR5; (4) chemokine cluster:  CCR9, CCR7, CCR10, CXCR4, CXCR6, CCR6, CXCR3, CXCR5, CXCR2, CCR3,  CCR1, CCR5, CCR2, CCR4, CCR8, CX3C1, XCR1, CXCR1; (5) aminergic cluster:   5HT1A, 5HT1B, 5HT1D, 5HT1E, 5HT1F, 5HT2A, 5HT2B, 5HT2C, 5HT4R, 5HT5A,   5HT6R, 5HT7R, ACM1, ACM2, ACM3, ACM4, ACM5, ADA1A, ADA1B, ADA1D,   ADA2A, ADA2B, ADA2C, ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRB3, DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4,  DRD5, HRH1, HRH2, HRH3, HRH4, TAAR; (6) adrenergic cluster: ADRB1,   ADRB2, ADRB3; (7) adenosine cluster: AA1R, AA2AR, AA2BR, GP119. Structure-   based sequence alignments, conservation statistics and residue property features  for every receptor position of these groups were collected through the GPCRdb  API (http://gpcrdb.org/services/reference/)4,31 using Python scripts. Residue    2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'article reSearcHproperty groups associated with a certain type of molecular interaction were  defined as in GPCRdb4,31 (small: A, C, D, G, N, P , S, T, V; aromatic: F, W , Y , H;  aliphatic-hydrophobic: A, V , I, L, M, C, P; positive charge: H, K, R; negative charge:  D, E; hydrogen-bonding: D, E, H, K, N, Q, R, S, T, W , Y). Interacting receptor   positions were identified as described above. For each receptor group, we calculated  the molecular property signatures (Extended Data Fig. 9) for their ability to couple  to a particular G-protein family by comparing the subsets of coupling and non-   coupling receptors within the group, respectively (primary and secondary coupling  data from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology database). Each signature was  composed of a unique combination of residue positions with distinct conservation  (percentage in G  x coupling minus the percentage in G  x non-coupling receptors)  of residue properties at each position. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'This calculation was performed using the  pandas Python library (http://pandas.pydata.org/). Selectivity signatures of residue  properties were visualized using matplotlib (http://matplotlib.org/). Investigations  of sequence patterns, selectivity determinants and sequence conservation (Fig. 5d   and Extended Data Fig. 9c ) were performed using the Spial ( http://www.mrc-lmb. cam.ac.uk/genomes/spial/ ) web server38 and visualized by WebLogo3 (ref. 59 ). The  parameters used for generating Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig. 9c in Spial were a  conservation cut-off of 0.1, specificity cut-off for V2R-clade panel of 0.25 and for G s-binding panels 0.50. Webserver to investigate GPCRG-protein interface. Use of common residue  numbering systems to compare GPCR and G-protein positions. To make the findings  presented here applicable to any G protein and GPCR (Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': '10), the  CGN system (CGN webserver: http://www.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/CGN)22 and the  GPCRdb numbering system (http://gpcrdb.org)4,31 have been used throughout  this paper. G-protein information and alignments . For each G protein, a web page with  sequence data, structural information and snake-like diagram visualizations is given (protein or subfamily selection at http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/).  Sequence information of all human G proteins and orthologues thereof has been  incorporated into the GPCRdb to allow for segment-specific alignments  according  to the CGN system. Additional conservation statistics for several amino-acid   properties and a consensus sequence are shown. Predefined-sets, for example for  the selectivity barcode or allosteric binding domains, are provided for easy access.  Furthermore, a site search tool has been added that allows users to manually define  a site (positions and amino-acid sets therein) and match it to the alignments to  retrieve the receptor profile that shares the given site. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'In addition, the interface  positions as well as neutral, conserved and selectivity-determining positions can  be mapped on each G-protein snake-like diagram and adjusted by a user-defined  identity conservation cut-off (for example, as shown in Extended Data Fig. 10).  This allows users to investigate and scrutinize each position in any human G   protein of interest. G-protein coupling properties of human GPCRs. The G-protein coupling data from  the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology database, as described above, are pre - sented in a Venn diagram (http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/statistics) and a phy- logenetic treeboth displaying the sets of receptors that couple to the different   (sets of) G proteins. Intersections and nodes, respectively, can be selected to  retrieve specific receptor (sub)sets of the whole GPCRome or subclasses for further  analyses, such as structure-based sequence alignment (for example, G   protein  interface residue alignment) or phylogenetic (sub)trees. G  interface mapping of selected receptors . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'To analyse and infer potential   selectivity-determining residues for any receptor, we have provided a compre - hensive analysis tool (http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/ginterface)4,31 that allows  researchers to map a selected receptor, using the IUPHAR receptor nomencla - ture, onto the determined G   interface. The generic residue positions from the  G  interface and G-protein accessible residues are visualized by a snake-like  diagram of the selected receptor residue topologies and an interaction browser,  for which conserved and non-conserved interactions are depicted. G-protein  interacting receptor positions were defined as described above (see section on  receptor selectivity pattern identification). G-protein accessible receptor positions  were defined as those within 5  of, and facing, the G protein in the structure  complexes of  2G  s, A2Amini G  s, and opsinG  t (complete G protein super - posed to the peptide fragment), and therefore potentially able to form interactions in an alternative, more proximal binding mode of the G protein. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'This led to the  identification of 33 G-protein contacting residues and 6 additional G-protein  accessible residues. Code availability.  The open source code is available at GitHub (https://github. com/protwis/protwis). For availability of codes that were developed in-house,  please contact the corresponding authors. Data availability.  All relevant data are integrated into the web resource in the  GPCR database31 (top menu item Signal Proteins at http://www.gpcrdb.org) and  are available at GitHub (https://github.com/protwis/gpcrdb_data). All other data  that support the findings of this study are provided as Supplementary Data. 35. Pawson, A. J. et al. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY:   an expert-driven knowledgebase of drug targets and their ligands. Nucleic  Acids Res. 42, D1098D1106 (2014). 36. Finn, R. D. et al. The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable future. Nucleic Acids Res. 44 (D1), D279D285 (2016). 37. UniProt Consortium. UniProt: a hub for protein information. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D204D212 (2015). 38. Wuster, A., Venkatakrishnan, A. J., Schertler, G. F. & Babu, M. M. Spial: analysis of subtype-specific features in multiple sequence alignments of proteins. Bioinformatics 26, 29062907 (2010). 39. Fredriksson, R. & Schith, H. B. The repertoire of G-protein-coupled receptors in fully sequenced genomes. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 14141425 (2005). 40. Altenhoff, A. M., Schneider, A., Gonnet, G. H. & Dessimoz, C. OMA 2011: orthology inference among 1000 complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,  D289D294 (2011). 41. Vilella, A. J. et al. EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Complete, duplication-aware phylogenetic trees in vertebrates. Genome Res. 19, 327335 (2009). 42. Finn, R. D. et al. HMMER web server: 2015 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 43 (W1),  W30W38 (2015). 43. Putnam, N. H. et al. Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire and genomic organization. Science 317, 8694 (2007). 44. Srivastava, M. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The Trichoplax genome and the nature of placozoans. Nature 454, 955960 (2008). 45. Paradis, E., Claude, J. & Strimmer, K. APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and  Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 20, 289290 (2004). 46. Ruan, J. et al. TreeFam: 2008 Update. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, D735D740  (2008). 47. Pei, J., Sadreyev, R. & Grishin, N. V. PCMA: fast and accurate multiple sequence alignment based on profile consistency. Bioinformatics 19, 427428 (2003). 48. Krissinel, E. & Henrick, K. Inference of macromolecular assemblies from  crystalline state. J. Mol. Biol. 372, 774797 (2007). 49. Rost, B. & Sander, C. Conservation and prediction of solvent accessibility in protein families. Proteins 20, 216226 (1994). 50. Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 13, 24982504 (2003). 51. Shannon, P. T., Grimes, M., Kutlu, B., Bot, J. J. & Galas, D. J. RCytoscape: tools for exploratory network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 217 (2013). 52. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Su, G., Kuchinsky, A., Morris, J. H., States, D. J. & Meng, F. GLay: community  structure analysis of biological networks. Bioinformatics 26, 31353137 (2010). 53. Morris, J. H. et al. clusterMaker: a multi-algorithm clustering plugin for  Cytoscape. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 436 (2011). 54. Doncheva, N. T., Assenov, Y., Domingues, F. S. & Albrecht, M. Topological  analysis and interactive visualization of biological networks and protein  structures. Nature Protocols 7, 670685 (2012). 55. Liu, Y., Schmidt, B. & Maskell, D. L. MSAProbs: multiple sequence alignment  based on pair hidden Markov models and partition function posterior  probabilities. Bioinformatics 26, 19581964 (2010). 56. Konagurthu, A. S., Whisstock, J. C., Stuckey, P. J. & Lesk, A. M. MUSTANG:    a multiple structural alignment algorithm. Proteins 64, 559574 (2006). 57. Price, M. N., Dehal, P. S. & Arkin, A. P. FastTree 2  approximately maximum- likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE 5, e9490 (2010). 58. Kumar, S., Stecher, G. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 9, 'content': '& Tamura, K. MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics  Analysis version 7.0 for bigger datasets. Mol. Biol. Evol. 33, 18701874 (2016). 59. Crooks, G. E., Hon, G., Chandonia, J. M. & Brenner, S. E. WebLogo: a sequence  logo generator. Genome Res. 14, 11881190 (2004). 60. Letunic, I. & Bork, P. Interactive tree of life (iTOL) v3: an online tool for the  display and annotation of phylogenetic and other trees. Nucleic Acids Res. 44  (W1), W242W245 (2016). 61. Grant, B. J., Rodrigues, A. P., ElSawy, K. M., McCammon, J. A. & Caves, L. S. Bio3d: an R package for the comparative analysis of protein structures. Bioinformatics 22,  26952696 (2006).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 10, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 1 | G-protein coupling properties of human  GPCRs. a, Number of GPCRs with distinct primary signal transduction  (G-protein coupling) for each GPCR family as annotated in the IUPHAR/ BPS Guide to Pharmacology database (GtoPdb). Only primary transduction , as defined by the database, is shown here. Note that   Fig. 1c, d shows both primary and secondary coupling. b , Number of  GPCRs with distinct primary signal transduction properties grouped by  GPCR class.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 11, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 2 | Gene expression profile of human GPCRs  and G proteins. The gene expression level (transcriptome) of human G proteins (top) and GPCRs (bottom) across 84 healthy tissues or cell types  is shown. The right insets show histograms of the number of G proteins  (blue) or GPCRs (red) that are expressed in one or multiple tissues. This highlights that at least one member of each G-protein subfamily (G   s, G i/o, G  q/11, G  12/13) is ubiquitously expressed in most tissues. Other  subtypes, such as G  t, are more tissue-specific. GPCRs, on the other  hand, seem to be much more tissue-specific and are only expressed in single or few tissues, except for some ubiquitously expressed GPCRs such  as chemokine receptors. Normalized expression data were derived from  BioGPS (http://biogps.org).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 12, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 3 | Asymmetric evolution of GPCR and G  protein repertoires. a , The GPCR and G   protein repertoires (unique  genes) across 13 representative organisms determined using Pfam domain  annotations (see Methods and Supplementary Table). The number of class  A receptors slightly differs from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology database as class A taste receptors are classified as a separate Pfam family. b, The lineage-specific expansion and differentiation of the GPCR and  G-protein repertoires during evolution. The numbers of G proteins and GPCRs are shown for C. owczarzaki (an early-branching unicellular sister  group of metazoans), T. adhaerens (one of the oldest known multicellular organism) and humans.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 13, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 4 | Phylogenetic age of human GPCRs and G  proteins. a, Estimation of the phylogenetic age of human GPCRs and  G proteins by identifying the most distant one-to-one orthologues (dark  grey) or any orthologue (light grey) from 215 organisms in the OMA  database. The phylogenetic age was determined by the branching times of humans and the oldest organisms that share either a one-to-one    orthologue or any orthologue (onemany or manyone or manymany) with the human gene (Methods). The classification of GPCRs follows the IUPHAR receptor classification. b , Complete table of the GPCR  and G-protein repertoire and the phylogenetic overlap of the protein repertoires. The Jaccard similarity index (Methods) was used for the GPCR and G-protein repertoires in the 12 completely sequenced genomes from the different eukaryotic lineages. The subscripts u and s for organisms A and B refer to the number of unique and shared genes,  respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 13, 'content': ' 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 14, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 5 | Conservation of residue positions among  orthologues and paralogues in G  proteins. a , Jitterplots showing  the degree of sequence conservation (sequence identity) of each CGN  position in G   proteins. The plots show the degree of conservation in  each one-to-one orthologue alignment for each G   subtype versus the  conservation of the human paralogue alignment (alignments are provided  as Supplementary Data and can be visualized to identify which amino acids were fixed at what time points during evolution). b , Boxplot showing the distribution of the relative accessible surface area of residue positions in each group for G   s (mapped onto G  i with PDB accession number  1GP2). c, The conserved positions at the interface of the   2ARG  s (PDB  accession number 3SN6) form central clusters (magenta) and tend to be surrounded by selectivity-determining positions (blue). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 14, 'content': 'The average  distances among positions are conserved-to-conserved: 9.84 , conserved- to-specific: 11.23 , specific-to-specific: 12.20 .  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 15, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 6 | Integration of sequence- and structure- derived information to understand how GPCRs read the G-protein selectivity barcode. a , G-protein selectivity barcode (Fig. 3d) mapped  onto the GPCRG-protein interface clusters obtained using the    2ARG  s   complex structure (Fig. 4 and Methods) highlights which regions of the GPCR contact selectivity-determining residues on the G protein. Nodes represent GPCR (rounded squares) and G-protein (circles) positions. The  edges and their width represent the number of atomic contacts between  residues. The size of the nodes is relative to their node degree (number of contacts to other nodes, which is a measure of how central a node is). Residues within the cluster are grouped and coloured differently in the background (red, blue, green, brown and yellow). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 15, 'content': 'b , Statistics highlighting  the results from integrating the G-protein barcode analysis (sequence- based analysis) with the structural clustering analysis (structure-based  analysis). The number of residues in G   s with a particular sequence  conservation property in each cluster (that is, universally conserved, neutrally evolving, selectivity-determining position) is shown. The  numbers of residues that map to the different GPCR and G-protein  secondary structure elements are shown both for GPCR and for G protein on the basis of the    2ARG  s complex structure (PDB accession   number 3SN6).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 16, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 7 | Comparison of the interface contacts and the  contacting residues between  2ARG s and A 2ARmini G s.   a, Comparison of the overall structure of both complex structures shows  that the two receptors bind the G protein in a similar binding mode. Root mean square deviation values are provided in the figure. b , Detailed  comparison of the residue contacts between equivalent positions of     2AR and A 2AR receptor with equivalent positions of G  s and the mini  G s construct used to obtain the complex structures. The exact residue  and the GPCRdb numbering scheme for the receptor and the CGN system for the G protein are shown on the axes. Contacts (coloured cells in the matrix) and positions (horizontal and vertical coloured bars next to the axes) that are common or unique to the    2ARG  s or A 2ARmini G  s  complex are shown in different colours. The G-protein selectivity barcode as in Fig. 3 is shown in the bottom of the matrix. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 16, 'content': 'This analysis suggests  that while the same positions of the G protein and GPCRs may be involved  in the recognition, distinct residues (both positions and the amino-acid residue) on the two different receptors contact them. In other words, the same selectivity barcode presented by G   s is read differently by receptors  belonging to different subtypes.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 17, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 8 | Phylogenetic tree of GPCRs and mapping  of ancestral reconstruction of coupling selectivity. A phylogenetic tree of human class A, B and C GPCRs was derived from a full-length  GPCR multiple sequence alignment that was created in-house (Methods).  Concentric circles illustrate the G-protein coupling selectivity of each GPCR: the four dots depict both primary and secondary G-protein coupling (from inside to outside: G   s, G  i/o, G  q/11, G  12/13). The inset  on the top left shows a magnification of one clade in the phylogenetic tree. G-protein coupling of each ancestral node was reconstructed by  considering only the primary coupling of the receptors (Methods).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 18, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 9 | See next page for caption.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 19, 'content': 'article reSearcHExtended Data Figure 9 | Selectivity patterns at the GPCRG-protein  interface. a, Using the phylogenetic history to define receptor clades with  a common ancestor uncovers distinct conserved properties of amino  acids at specific interface positions on the receptor. The figure shows  molecular property signatures (ability of residues at a given G-protein interface position to mediate a distinct type of molecular interaction) on the intracellular interface of GPCRs. Each circle represents a property (coloured) and its distinctiveness (sizing) within the receptors that couple to the given G-protein subtype (versus those that do not). There is no  conserved sequence pattern in all the receptors that couple to the same  G  protein. b, Receptors that form a phylogenetic clade exhibit distinct  molecular property signatures (Methods). The legend (bottom) shows the colour scheme used for amino acids with different properties. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 19, 'content': 'c , Sequence  pattern determined by Spial (Methods) of the interface positions (left). Top: clades of vasopressin 2 receptor (V2R) and   -adrenoreceptors    ( ARs), which belong to different groups, both couple to G  s. However,  the common ancestor of the V2R-related receptor coupled to G  q (suggesting alteration of selectivity) whereas the common ancestor of  aminergic receptors coupled to G  s proteins (suggesting inheritance  of selectivity). An analysis of the equivalent interface positions on the receptor that contact the G   protein shows that V2R independently  accumulated a different set of mutations in the same region to selectively  couple to G   s and hence arrived at a different sequence pattern to read  the selectivity barcode on G  s. Bottom: adenosine-clade and   ARs  (which belong to different groups) that both couple to G  s and have  complex evolutionary histories (Extended Data Fig. 8). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 19, 'content': 'An analysis of the equivalent interface positions on the receptor that contact the G   protein  shows that A 2AR independently accumulated a different set of mutations in  the same region to couple to G  s and hence arrived at a different sequence  pattern to read the same selectivity barcode on G  s (see also Extended  Data Fig. 7b). Mutagenesis of the A 2B receptor has shown that the positions  3x50, 3x54, 5x69, 6x36 and 6x37 affect the coupling of G   proteins G  q,   G 12, G  13, G  14, G  i1, G  i2 and G  15 (see also Supplementary Table 1).  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Selectivity determinants of GPCR–G-protein binding', 'page': 20, 'content': 'article reSearcH Extended Data Figure 10 | Webserver for the analysis of GPCRG- protein selectivity. Summary of the features in GPCRdb, describing the receptorG-protein binding interface. These features allow   users to investigate various aspects of receptorG-protein binding selectivity and G-protein-specific information for all the human GPCRs and G proteins.  2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 1, 'content': 'G protein- coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest  family of cell surface receptor proteins in eukaryotes. In  humans, they are encoded by over 800 individual genes  and are widely expressed in various tissues, where they control a broad range of physiological processes. The pervasive role of GPCRs in human physiology arises  from evolutionary diversity in the sequence encoding  the seven transmembrane domains (TMDs), which form the core of the receptor common to all GPCRs. On the basis of sequence and evolutionary conservation, these  receptors are divided into subfamilies that include class  A ( rhodopsin - like), class B1 (secretin receptor- like),  class B2 (adhesion receptors), class C (metabotropic  glutamate receptor- like) and class F (frizzled- like) sub- families as well as the taste 2 sensory receptor subfamily  (GPCR Database). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 1, 'content': 'GPCR diversity is further elaborated  by numerous mechanisms including alternative splicing,  RNA editing, post-  translational modifications and   proteinprotein interactions that alter both the repertoire of   ligand interaction and the functional consequences   of receptor activation1. This diversity allows these recep- tors to recognize and respond to an enormous variety of ligands that range from photons, odorants, ions, small  neurotransmitters and small neuromodulatory peptides to large peptide hormones, glycoprotein hormones and  other large protein domains, including those involved  in direct cellcell communication and viral entry 2.  Another key component of the versatility of GPCR sig- nalling is the breadth of intracellular proteins that they  can engage with (see next paragraph). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 1, 'content': 'These intracellular partners include numerous heterotrimeric G proteins, which serve as canonical transducer proteins, as well  as regulatory and scaffolding proteins such as arrestins ,   PDZ- domain-containing scaffolds and non- PDZ scaf- folds, such as A kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs) that  initiate or control distinct patterns of signalling37 (Fig. 1). To elicit signalling, GPCRs need to couple with intra- cellular transducers such as heterotrimeric Gproteins, which are formed by G, G and G subunits. In humans, there are 16 G, 5 G and 13 G subunits that can combine to form a wide range of heterotrimeric  Gproteins. Each G subunit can signal independently,  whereas the G subunits and G subunits are obli-gate heterodimers that function as a single unit (G).  Rhodopsin A light- sensitive g protein-   coupled receptor involved in  visual phototransduction.Mechanisms of signalling and  biased agonism in G protein- coupled  receptors DeniseWootten1,2*, ArthurChristopoulos1, MariaMarti- Solano3, M.MadanBabu  3  and PatrickM.Sexton  1,2* Abstract | G protein- coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest group of cell surface receptors in  humans that signal in response to diverse inputs and regulate a plethora of cellular processes.  Hence, they constitute one of the primary drug target classes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Progress in our understanding of  GPCR dynamics, activation and signalling has opened new possibilities for selective drug  development. A key advancement has been provided by the concept of biased agonism, which  describes the ability of ligands acting at the same GPCR to elicit distinct cellular signalling  profiles by pre fer entially stabilizing different active conformational states of the receptor.  Application of this concept raises the prospect of designer biased agonists as optimized  therapeutics with improved efficacy and/or reduced side- effect profiles. However, this  application will require a detailed understanding of the spectrum of drug actions and a structural understanding of the drugreceptor interactions that drive distinct pharmacologies. The recent  revolution in GPCR structural biology provides unprecedented insights into ligand binding,  conformational dynamics and the control of signalling outcomes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 1, 'content': 'These insights, together with  new approaches to multi- dimensional analysis of drug action, are allowing refined classification  of drugs according to their pharmacodynamic profiles, which can be linked to receptor structure  and predictions of preclinical drug efficacy. 1Drug Discovery Biology,  Monash Institute of  Pharmaceutical Sciences,  Monash University, Parkville,  Victoria, Australia. 2School of Pharmacy, Fudan  University, Shanghai, China. 3MRC Laboratory of  Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge  Biomedical Campus,  Cambridge, UK. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The 16 G subunits can be classified into 4 major G fam- ilies (Gs, Gi/o, Gq/11 and G12/13) that regulate key effectors  (for example, adenylyl cyclase, phospholipase C, etc.) and  the generation of secondary messengers (for example, cAMP , Ca2+, inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (Ins(1,4,5) P3),  etc.), which in turn trigger distinct signalling cascades. It is now well established that numerous distinct receptors  can couple to the same G protein and that the same receptor can also couple to more than one G protein. G subunits have both regulatory and signalling func- tions, including, for example, serving as scaffolds for  receptor kinases and as modulators of ion channels 8.  More recently, our understanding of G protein activation  has progressed to include ligand- dependent effects on   G protein conformation that are linked to signalling effi- cacy9,10. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Advances in cloning and sequencing and global  approaches to identification of other GPCRprotein  interactions11,12 have further expanded the repertoire  and/or complexity of potential consequences of GPCR activation. The most abundantly studied of these   GPCR interacting partners are arrestins, which serve  as negative regulatory proteins for signalling through G proteins (by blocking the activated receptors from  binding to heterotrimeric G proteins (signalling desen- sitization) and by targeting ligand- occupied GPCRs for  endocytosis). However, they can also function as scaf-folds for initiation of additional signalling, prominently including activation of various MAPKs, such as ERK 13.  The latter is often termed arrestin- dependent, G protein-   independent signalling14, although the extent to which  such signalling may require initial G protein recruit- ment, or can be modulated by G protein-  dependent  signalling, is still under study15. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': 'For example, a thought-   provoking recent study on the requirement for G pro-tein for arrestin- mediated signalling has revealed that  signalling (ERK phosphorylation), mediated by arres- tin may require G protein, but that arrestin- dependent  receptor internalization can be achieved in the absence  of functional G protein 15. Indeed, arrestin engagement  by GPCRs may occur in the absence of receptor activa-tion owing to heterologous phosphorylation by second  messenger kinases 16, and these behaviours need to be  understood when developing novel GPCR ligands. Given the near universal importance of GPCRs in  normal development and physiology, it is not surprising that perturbations in GPCRs and/or their transducers can have major roles in the initiation and progression  of disease. Currently, ~30% of approved drugs target  GPCRs, but these drugs act at only a small subset of the GPCR repertoire 17,18, and there is intense interest in  further pharmaceutical exploitation of these proteins18. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': ' Nonetheless, lack of expected clinical efficacy remains  a major cause of GPCR drug failure that is indicative  of important gaps in our understanding of GPCR sig-nalling and, in particular, their response to specific ligands. The current obstacles to successful pharmaco- logical targeting of GPCRs include the disease- specific  variability in drug efficacy that occurs in a signalling   pathway- dependent manner, disease heterogeneity, the   state of disease progression and the variation in recep-tor behaviour associated with polymorphisms in  receptor sequences within the human population 18,19. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': '  In the past decade, and particularly in recent years, there  has been a leap in our understanding of the complex- ity of the mechanisms and dynamics of GPCR function   that promises to provide new paths to both identification /uni03B2/uni03B1 /uni03B3 /uni03B1U/uni03B1K/uni03B1S/uni03B1\x13\x14 /uni03B1U/uni03B1U:./uni03B1QNH/uni03B1K \x13s\x15\x0b/uni03B1Q\x0e\x02/uni03B1V/uni03B1\\\x0e\x02/uni03B1IWUV/uni03B1S\x0e\x02/uni03B1\x13\x13/uni03B1\x13\x16/uni03B1\x13\x17\x11\x13\x18/uni03B1\x13\x14/uni03B1\x13\x15/uni03B2 /uni03B2\x13s\x17/uni03B3\x13s\x13\x16/uni03B3&QYPUVTGCO UKIPCNNKPI /uni03B1 /uni03B2/uni03B35ECHHQNFKPI RTQVGKPU  HQT\x02GZCORNG\x0e\x02#- #2U\x0e -54\x13\x02QT\x02,.2\x0b +PETGCUGF\x02QT\x02FGETG CUGF EGNNWNCT\x02TG URQPUG&QYPUVTGCO\x02UKIPCNNKPI 2-%2-# 2.%#-#2U 0QP\x0f2&< UECHHQNFU2-% 22\x14$ 4#556#62-# r\x02+PETGCUGF\x02QT\x02FGET GCUGF\x02UKIPCNNKPI r\x024CVG\x02QH\x02KPVGT PCNK\\CVKQPr\x024GEGRVQT\x02KPVGT PCNK\\CVKQP  GPFQE[VQUKU\x0b r\x024GEGRVQT\x02FGIT CFCVKQP r\x026GTOKPCVKQP\x02QH\x02)\x02RT QVGKP\x02UKIPCNNKPI r\x02)\x02RTQVGKP\x0fKPFGRGPFGPV\x02UKIPCNNKPI2&<\x02UECHHQNFU2&<\x02UECHHQNFU 0QP\x0f2&<\x02UECHHQNFU #TTGUVKPUC\x02\x02)\x02RTQVGKP\x02CEVKX CVKQP D\x02\x025ECHHQNFKPI\x02RT QVGKPU\x02TGIWNCVKPI\x02)2%4\x02UKIPCNNKPI.KICPF)2%4 6TKOGTKE )\x02RTQVGKP +QP EJCPPGN #TTGUVKP.KICPF )2%4 Fig. 1 | Schematic illustration of GPCR signalling. a | Canonical G protein- coupled  receptor (GPCR) signalling occurs via coupling to heterotrimeric G proteins (G , G and  G). Upon activation by a GPCR , the G  and G  subunits dissociate and can each  activate downstream signalling. G  proteins can be subdivided into four main families  with different signalling properties. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': 'There are also multiple G  and G  subunits, which  further diversifies signalling responses. G  and G  subunits can also associate with  scaffolding proteins that regulate their signalling profiles. b | A schematic of GPCR  scaffolding proteins that have key roles in the regulation of GPCR signalling and are also  involved in forming higher order, tightly regulated signalling complexes, termed  signalosomes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 2, 'content': 'These scaffolds can be divided into three broad categories: PDZ scaffolds,  which associate with the distal portions of GPCR carboxyl termini and can couple the GPCR to various signalling proteins such as kinases (for example, protein kinase C (PKC)), phospholipases (for example, phospholipase C (PLC)) and ion channels; non- PDZ  scaffolds, such as A kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs), which bind to the cytoplasmic face of GPCRs and also associate with multiple signalling partners including kinases (for example, PKA and PKC), phosphatases (for example, serine/threonine- protein  phosphatase 2B (PP2B)) and intracellularly localized receptors (such as inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptors (InsP 3Rs) in the endoplasmic reticulum; not shown); and  arrestins, which associate with many GPCRs, disrupting G proteinGPCR interactions and driving GPCR internalization via endocytosis, and act as scaffolds to facilitate multiple interactions between GPCRs and cytoplasmic signalling proteins in a G protein-   independent manner. Of note, GPCRs themselves can serve as scaffolding proteins for other membrane proteins, including other GPCRs and receptor modifying proteins, as exemplified by receptor activity- modifying proteins (RAMPs) (not shown). JLP , JNK-   associated leucine- zipper protein (also known as SPAG9); KSR1, kinase suppressor of  RAS1; STAT , signal transducer and activator of transcription. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': 'and development of novel GPCR drugs and translational  understanding of how these can be optimally used for  therapeutic intervention. Among the foremost of these  developments is recognition that GPCR ligands can exhibit biased agonism, the ability of individual ligands acting at the same receptor to initiate diverse cellular  outcomes. In this Review, we outline recent advances in  our understanding of the mechanistic basis for receptor activation and biased agonism. Complexity of GPCR signalling Historically, GPCRs were viewed as quiescent proteins that require activation by an agonist , which allows them  to act as selective conduits between a physiological   (or pharmacological) ligand and a specific G protein transducer pathway. Consequently, GPCR subtypes are still often classified according to both their activating ligand and their preferentially recognized subfamily of  G proteins. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Nonetheless, most, if not all, GPCRs can cou- ple to multiple transducer and modulatory proteins as a consequence of the conformational dynamics intrinsic to all these proteins 5,20,21 (Fig. 2). Conformational dynamics of GPCRs and diversity in GPCR signalling. GPCRs are allosteric proteins that allow communication from the outside to the inside of cells. To achieve this, they sample multiple confor - mations, even in the absence of activating ligands (the apo state)  (Fig. 2a). Endogenous ligands and drugs alter  these receptor conformational dynamics, affecting the  temporal and spatial profile of transducer and regulatory  protein engagement. There is now evidence that this conformational plasticity can profoundly influence responses that are elicited by a given ligand 4,5,2224. Ligand  behaviour can be described by two key parameters:  affinity (the ability to bind) and efficacy (the functional  consequence of binding) (Box 1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Our understanding of  the complexity of GPCR responses has evolved from  a simplistic, linear model of agonist efficacy  where  all signalling is proportional  to a model that encom-passes the pluridimensionality of receptortransducer coupling and transducer activation as well as the con- cept of biased agonism  the ability of individual  interacting ligands to differentially alter the pattern of the downstream cellular response 13,25 (Box 2). Furthermore, for some receptors, including viral  chemokine receptor GPCR homologue US28 (reF.26),  dopamine receptors27, and 5-hydroxytryptamine  receptor 2C (5HT2C)28, ligand- independent signalling  (constitutive activity) that can often be unmasked by  overexpression or mutation of the GPCR can also be  observed. This implies that GPCRs have been selected to exhibit a broad spectrum of intrinsic quiescence ver - sus constitutive activity according to functional need. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Biophysical and biochemical studies have confirmed that the level of constitutive activity exhibited by indi-vidual receptors is linked to their conformational  dynamics and is modulated by the strength of interac- tions between amino acids within the transmembrane core of the receptor, particularly between the conserved polar amino acids that form interaction networks at the  base of the receptor 5,21,29. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': "Constitutive activity of GPCRs  can be modulated both physiologically, through changes to expression of receptor or transducer, RNA splicing  or RNA editing (as noted for 5HT2C 27), or through  post- translational modifications, and in disease, when 44/uni20324/uni2032/uni20324GSWKTGF\x02CEVKXCVKQP GPGTI[ %QPHQTOCVKQPCN\x02NCPFUECRG4\x0c4\x0c\x0c#RQ \r\x02CIQPKUV\x02QT\x02)\x02RT QVGKP \r\x02CIQPKUV\x02CPF\x02)\x02RT QVGKP /uni03B3/uni03B2/uni03B3/uni03B1 )&2 /uni03B2/uni03B3/uni03B1 )&2 #TTGUVKP #TTGUVKP #TTGUVKP 'HHGEVQT\x02\x13 'HHGEVQT\x02\x14#TTGUVKP #TTGUVKP .KICPF\x02\x13.KICPF\x02\x13 .KICPF\x02\x13.KICPF\x02\x14.KICPF\x02\x14 /uni03B2/uni03B3/uni03B2/uni03B1 )&2/uni03B1 /uni03B1 )62 )&2 )&2)62/uni03B2/uni03B1 /uni03B3#FGP[N E[ENCUG 2K /uni03B3.KICPF\x02\x14 /uni03B2/uni03B3/uni03B2/uni03B1 )&2/uni03B1 /uni03B1 )62 )&2/uni03B2/uni03B3#FGP[N E[ENCUG 2K/uni03B1 )&2)62(CUV\x02GZEJCPIG 5NQY\x02GZEJCPIGC E\x02\x02&KHHGTGPV\x02EQPHQTOCVKQP\x02QH\x02VJG\x02UECHHQNF F\x02\x02&KHHGTGPV\x02EQPHQTOCVKQP\x02QH\x02VJG\x02VT CPUFWEGT\x02 )\x02RT QVGKP\x0bD\x02\x02&KHHGTGPV\x02EQPHQTOCVKQP\x02QH\x02VJG\x02T GEGRVQT )2%4 6TKOGTKE\x02)\x02RTQVGKP +QP EJCPPGN 5NQY\x02TGURQPUG Fig. 2 | Mechanisms of ligand- induced biased agonism. a | A schematic illustrating  conformational dynamics occurring in G protein- coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPCRs can  move between various inactive- like (R , R and R) and active- like (R* and R**) states. This  can occur in the absence of ligand (Apo, black line); however, the energy barrier to  achieving these states makes their occurrence a low probability. Addition of agonist or G protein (blue line) can decrease the energy required to reach active states, but full conformational change is favoured by the addition of both agonist and G protein (green line). bd | Biased agonism can arise via multiple mechanisms. ", 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Distinct ligands induce  different conformations within the receptor, resulting in different recruitment profiles for  effector proteins such as G proteins and arrestins (part b). Ligand- induced receptor  conformations can promote different conformational changes within scaffolding  proteins such as arrestins, which in turn promotes activation of different downstream signalling pathways (for example, different MAPKs) (part c). Different ligands can induce  distinct conformational rearrangements within G proteins that result in differences in the rate of GTPGDP exchange. Ligands that induce a faster rate of GTP association (and hydrolysis) (top panel) allow quantitatively more G protein and downstream signalling events per unit of time than ligands that induce a slow rate of exchange (bottom panel) (part d). P i, inorganic phosphate. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'alterations to these mechanisms, such as by mutation of  active- conformation-stabilizing amino acid networks or  via alterations to the cellular environment (changes to membrane environment, pH, etc.), can occur 30,31. Activity  of GPCRs may also be intrinsically regulated, with exam- ples of receptors that require induced expression (or  chaperones)3234 to reach the cell surface, and receptors  that undergo very rapid turnover, being dynamically  endocytosed and recycled from and to the membrane35.  Pathological constitutive activity can be disease causing, as observed for the role of the constitutively active mutant  of the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-   related peptide receptor (PTH1R) in the pathology of Jansens metaphyseal chondrodysplasia 36 or by the impact  of constitutively active mutants of the extracellular Ca2+- sensing receptor CASR on the loss of Ca2+ homeostasis37. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': ' Aberrant constitutive activity can also modify disease,  as illustrated by the role of constitutively active metabo- tropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) in brain alterations observed in autism spectrum disorder 38.It is now clear that GPCRs exist in multiple inactive  and active conformations, even in the apo state (Fig. 2a).  Studies on rhodopsin have provided clear delineation  of multiple meta- stable conformational states of varying  half- life that are altered during photon- driven isomer - ization of retinal and receptor activation39. Multiple  ligand- independent and ligand- specific states have also  been observed for other GPCRs5,21. An evolving view of ligand pharmacology. The goal  of the vast majority of pharmaceutical discovery and development programmes is to identify drugs that either block or promote receptor activation. For a  given readout of activation, an individual ligand can  be typically classified as a full agonist, partial agonist, neutral antagonist or inverse (full or partial) agonist  (Box 2). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Differences in both the type and the strength  of chemical interactions between distinct ligands and  an individual GPCR can affect ligand residence times,  drive changes in receptor conformation and determine Box 1 | Understanding drug behaviour for clinical translation To contextualize new advances in understanding structurefunction relationships in G protein- coupled receptors  (GPCRs), we must first consider how we describe and classify drug behaviour and define those components that are  intrinsic to the bi- molecular interaction between ligand and receptor relative to those that may be cell- type-specific,  organ- specific or even disease- specific (so- called system- dependent parameters). Modelling signalling output In its simplest form, the action of a drug can be separated into two key parameters: the ability of a drug to bind to the receptor (affinity) and its ability to trigger a cellular response upon binding (efficacy). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'A common pharmacological model for describing drug action at the receptor and cellular level is the operational model of agonism 178, which ascribes a  functional affinity and efficacy value to an observed response. This was originally applied to quantification of physiological measures, such as changes in whole organ responses, with the functional affinity value (K A) representing a  macroscopic composite of all true microscopic affinities for each physical ligandreceptortransducer complex making up the conformational ensemble. The efficacy parameter ( ) in the operational model is a composite measure subsuming:  the strength of interaction between each ligandreceptor complex that determines receptor coupling to a transducer protein to initiate a cellular signalling stimulus; the efficiency with which the stimulus is processed by cellular signalling pathways; and the total number of receptors mediating the observed response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'By contrast, clinical efficacy is the observed, whole body outcome of integrated cellular responses across all target tissues upon administration of any  pharmacological agent. At the most fundamental level, differences in drug behaviour are driven by the distinct chemical  interactions between ligand and receptor, which determine the conformational sampling of the ligandreceptor complex to influence both transducer and regulatory protein interaction and transducer activation. This behaviour is independent of cellular context, and quantification of individual pathway efficacies in a chosen cell type can allow phenotypic clustering of drug chemotypes (see also below). Nonetheless, such surrogate measures of drug behaviour will be distinct  from those displayed in native context, as each cell type will exhibit a unique level of expression, repertoire of receptors  and composition of transducer, scaffolding and regulatory proteins that combine to determine cellular and tissue response. moreover, this response can be further diversified by disease- specific changes to the proteins and the cellular  environment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Successful drug discovery and development requires both an understanding of the full spectrum of drug  behaviour and the ability to predict those properties in a manner that can bridge preclinical and clinical efficacy. Overcoming translational barriers Knowing that we have an incomplete understanding of the cellular consequence of GPCR drug action, how can we  overcome the barrier of their pharmacological diversity? Observed bias can, and does, change with time, and it varies according to the breadth of end points used to analyse drug action. An increasingly popular approach is broad assaying  of drug behaviour to cluster compounds into functional chemotypes 66,151, 179 182. The most advanced of these types of  approach can interrogate over 30 end points of GPCR function, including kinetic measurement of effects on G protein  recruitment and activation, signalling via second messengers and regulatory kinases and alterations to receptor  trafficking. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The functional chemotypes determined with these methods180, 183 can now be linked to clinical drug behaviour  (m. Bouvier, personal communication). Incorporating a minimum panel of diverse measures that can define a meaningful  functional chemotype during compound validation, hit- to-lead and candidate nomination pathways that occur within a  drug discovery pipeline may improve preclinical to clinical translation through greater pharmacological understanding of the drug leads entering into trials. most importantly, though, insights from structural studies are now leading to the  design of compounds with specific efficacies 72, and solution of new structures of these designer ligands in complex with  target receptors, combined with broad cellular assessment of receptor function, will provide increasing insight into the interactions that selectively alter receptor dynamics, leading to desired signalling profiles. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Arrestins A family of intracellular  transducers that can act as   g protein- coupled receptor  modulators by blocking   g protein- mediated signalling,  promoting receptor  internalization and activating   g protein- independent signalling pathways. Agonist A molecule that binds to and  stabilizes the receptor in an  active conformation, thereby  resulting in an intracellular  response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'transducer and/or regulator engagement, resulting in  biased agonism. While there has been general agreement that the  fundamental basis for biased agonism is ligand- specific  changes to GPCR conformation4042, until recently, the  classical view has been that differential signalling by  a particular ligand (and alterations to drug efficacy)  arises from the differences in efficiency of recruitment of the different transducers to the specific ligand   receptor complex conformation  (Fig. 2). New studies that  used bioluminescence resonance energy transfer  (BRET)- based and fluorescence resonance energy transfer  (FRET)- based conformational biosensors embedded within  subdomains of specific G proteins9,10,43 or arrestins44,45  have now revealed that the conformational differences in ligandreceptor complexes are also propagated to the  transducers. For arrestins, such conformational changes influence the interaction with potential scaffolded part-ners. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'For G proteins, these changes influence the rate  of GTP binding as well as G protein residence times in GPCR- bound complexes and, thus, G protein turnover,  thereby modulating the activation of their downstream  signalling targets  (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the nature of the  GPCRarrestin interaction is at least partially dependent  upon phosphorylation of conserved motifs on the recep- tor by either gPCr kinases  (GRKs) or second messenger  kinases46. There is accumulating evidence that indi- vidual ligands can induce specific patterns of receptor  phosphorylation (termed phosphorylation barcodes47)  linked to specific GRK recruitment13,48 that control both   the strength of arrestin interaction with the GPCR and the subsequent recruitment of downstream effectors 13,4652. Structural basis of GPCR signalling Advances in GPCR structure determination and bio- physical measures of GPCR dynamics are now providing  key insights into how GPCRs are activated by both cog- nate ligands and pharmacological agents. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'While details vary between GPCR classes and even between closely related receptors, the propagation of conformational Box 2 | Ligand classification, pluridimensionality of signalling and biased agonism ligands can be classified according to their binding site on the receptor, with the binding site of the canonical  endogenous agonist termed the orthosteric site and binding sites that are topographically distinct from the orthosteric site termed allosteric sites. In some cases, orthosteric binding sites and allosteric binding sites can reside in close  proximity, with ligands that can concomitantly bridge these two sites termed bitopic ligands 184. major outcomes from the  increasing number of G protein- coupled receptor (GPCR) structures is recognition of the diversity of location of  orthosteric and allosteric binding sites (with the location of these sites interchangeable across some receptor classes) and the observation that most, if not all, GPCRs possess at least one allosteric site 185. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Furthermore, allosteric ligands can be  highly diverse, including Na+, which is a negative allosteric modulator of many class A GPCRs, classic small molecule  compounds, antibodies, lipids and lipidated peptides (for example, pepducins)185, 186. When used as drugs, allosteric  ligands can possess the same spectrum of pharmacological activity as orthosteric ligands, but they establish distinct  chemical interactions with the receptor. As allosteric ligands can bind simultaneously with orthosteric ligands, they can  also alter the pharmacology of the latter, providing novel therapeutic opportunities (reviewed extensively  elsewhere184 186). In effect, when bound to an allosteric ligand, the receptorligand complex can be viewed as a novel  receptor with respect to how an orthosteric agonist propagates activation- associated conformational changes, and not  surprisingly, alteration to the profile of transducer engagement is a common feature of many allosteric modulators. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'An individual ligand can be typically classified as a full agonist, partial agonist, neutral antagonist or inverse (full or  partial) agonist. The changes in receptor function arise from the specific chemical interactions that each ligand establishes with its target receptor, which impact the conformational ensemble of the GPCR, shifting the states sampled and the rate of interchange between conformational states. The efficiency with which the resulting conformational  ensemble subsequently engages with or disengages from transducereffector pathways thus leads to the  aforementioned traditional phenotypic drug classifications. However, hitherto unappreciated differences in both the nature and the strength of chemical interaction between distinct ligands and an individual receptor can also drive changes in ligand residency and in transducer and/or regulator engagement that can vary for every downstream pathway. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This is often referred to as pluridimensional signalling and has led to the discovery of biased agonists as drugs  that differentially promote this phenomenon. Although such differences in receptorligand complex conformations can  be biophysically measured, these measurements are technically difficult and are often restricted to measurement of distance changes between a single pair of residues within the receptor. In practice, the identification of biased agonism occurs via functional measures in cells but can be determined only  when multiple (at least two) signalling end points are measured. moreover, changes to signalling profiles can be subtle,  requiring both depth of cellular interrogation and quantitative methods for measurement of relative agonist efficacy across all pathways. Because assessment of signalling bias is based on phenomenological readouts, the result can vary greatly according to cellular background and the nature of the response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Furthermore, biased agonism is always a relative term that is meaningful only when described relative to any differences from a reference agonist that has been assessed  in parallel in the same assay and cell type. Terms such as unbiased ligand or balanced ligand, when used to describe a  ligand with equivalent potency and/or efficacy in two different assays, can be problematic when system- dependent end  points are measured (for example, cAmP accumulation versus arrestin recruitment), as alterations to the system background can change such relative potencies (for example, increased expression of G protein or altered expression of a  GPCR kinase, which is linked to efficiency of arrestin recruitment). Thus, while biased agonism can be demonstrated from  only two measures of cellular response, for example, G protein- mediated signalling versus arrestin- mediated signalling,  this can provide only a very limited understanding of the potential pharmacologies of studied drugs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Consequently, if the two end points, even if different, are not the only (or worse, are not directly related to) therapeutically relevant signalling outputs, clinical translation will remain problematic. Bioluminescence resonance  energy transfer (BreT). A biophysical  technique combining a photon-   emitting bioluminescent luciferase and an acceptor  fluorescent protein, which is  used to monitor changes in  intramolecular and  intermolecular proximity. Fluorescence resonance  energy transfer (FreT). A biophysical technique  combining a donor  chromophore and an acceptor  chromophore, which is used   to monitor changes in intramolecular and  intermolecular proximity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'changes arising from agonist engagement converges  at the intracellular face of the receptor and leads to a  conserved outward movement of transmembrane helix  6 (TM6) that allows transducer recruitment and acti - vation. Nevertheless, despite conserved mechanisms of transducer engagement, downstream signalling from  GPCRs can vary considerably depending on the con- text. Here, we analyse the three best studied classes of GPCR, focusing on structural details that determine their signalling and contribute to biased agonism. Class A GPCRs. Class A GPCRs are the most abundant  GPCR subfamily, and this is reflected in the number   of unique receptor structures solved for the members of   this class. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Despite the vast diversity in their size and  architecture 53, a detailed analysis of several GPCR struc- tures has revealed common, conserved, non- covalent  contacts between equivalent receptor residues in the TMD, termed molecular signatures, which are linked to receptor quiescence and transition to activation  (Fig. 3). The existence of a ligand- binding cradle has  also been determined54. Although the structures of  numerous receptors have been solved, there are very  few receptors for which structures of both the agonist receptortransducer (or transducer mimetic ) complex  and the inactive, antagonist-  bound or inverse agonist-   bound state are available. Receptors solved in these two states include rhodopsin, 2-adrenergic receptor   (2-AR), muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M2 (mAChR), adenosine receptor A2A, - type opioid recep- tor (- OR) and - type opioid receptor (- OR) 5. There  are common general features that can be drawn from  these structures. For example, the extracellular face of the  receptor undergoes contraction upon agonist binding, and this contraction is allosterically linked to the opening of the transducer- binding site. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Moreover, this allosteric  mechanism is reciprocal, also working in the oppo-site direction, whereby the binding of the intracellular transducer fosters ligand- binding site closure 55. An analysis of non- covalent contacts between equiv- alent residues of the available structures in the active and inactive conformations has also revealed that, despite the diversity in the conformational changes near the ligand-   binding region between receptors, the changes converge  near the G protein- coupling region  (Fig. 3). This conver - gence is mediated by a highly conserved structural rear - rangement of residue contacts between TM3, TM6 and  TM7 that exposes G protein-  contacting residues56. This  permits interaction with subdomains of the G subunit,  including the carboxy- terminal 5 helix that is inserted  deep within the receptor, as seen in the solved active state  structures. These interactions promote nucleotide exchange and enable G protein activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'This convergence may  possibly explain how the conformational changes initiated  by ligands that are very structurally diverse enable GPCRs to bind a common repertoire of transducers. It is clear that reorganization of receptors to a fully  active state is not related to agonist binding alone but rather reflects changes to receptor dynamics that are driven by both the agonist and the transducer 5,21. This  reorganization is sometimes referred to as a loose  allosteric coupling and is based on the concept that  the receptor can explore multiple inactive, intermediate and active-  like states in the absence of a bound ligand  (Fig. 2a). This loose allosteric coupling can be visualized  in molecular dynamic simulations that examine the  stability of the active receptoragonist complex follow- ing G protein removal, as illustrated for the 2-ARGs  structure. These simulations revealed that the receptor  could revert to an inactive-  like conformation, even in  the presence of agonist57. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Nonetheless, multiple poten- tial meta- stable conformations were sampled during  the simulation, in particular, conformations associated  with changes to TM7, where TM6 was still retained in an active- like conformation. This is consistent with NMR  studies implicating relative differences in the position- ing of TM5 and TM7, but not necessarily TM6, in states  of the 2-AR favoured by agonists 58,59 and with the idea  that interactions with the transducers are required for  the receptor to acquire a fully active state58,59. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Recent data  suggest that G proteins can also form non-  functional  \x02 *\x17\x02 *\x13\x02)&2 r\x02.KICPFU\x02DKPF\x02VQ\x02FKHHGT GPV\x02TGIKQPU\x02PGCT\x02VJG NKICPF\x0fDKPFKPI\x02ET CFNG\x02QH\x02VJG\x02T GEGRVQT r\x02&KXGTUG\x02NKICPF\x02KPVGT CEVKQPU\x02VT KIIGT\x02FKUVKPEV EQPHQTOCVKQPCN\x02EJCPIGU\x02CET QUU\x02VJG\x02TGEGRVQT\x02 r\x02#EVKXCVKQP\x02UKIPCNU\x02EQPX GTIG\x02PGCT\x02VJG VTCPUFWEGT\x0fDKPFKPI\x02T GIKQP\x02QH\x02VJG\x02T GEGRVQT\x02 r\x02%QPUGTXGF\x02TGYKTKPI\x02QH\x02PQP\x0fEQX CNGPV\x02TGEGRVQT EQPVCEVU\x02GZRQUGU\x02)\x02RT QVGKP\x0fDKPFKPI\x02TG UKFWGU r\x024GEGRVQT\x02EQWRNKPI\x02KU\x02IWKFGF\x02D[\x02C\x02UGNGEVKX KV[ DCTEQFG\x02URGEKE\x02VQ\x02GCEJ\x02QH\x02VJG\x02\x13\x18\x02)/uni03B1\x02RT QVGKPU r\x02&KHHGTGPV\x02TGEGRVQTU\x02ECP\x02TGCF\x02VJG\x02UCOG DCTEQFG\x02WUKPI\x02FKUVKPEV\x02T GIKQPU\x02CPF EQPHQTOCVKQPU r\x02)2%4\x02DKPFKPI\x02KPFWEGU\x02)&2\x02T GNGCUG\x02CPF )\x02RTQVGKP\x02CEVKX CVKQP r\x02&KUTWRVKQP\x02QH\x02VJG\x02*\x13s*\x17\x02KPVGT CEVKQP\x02CPF *\x13\x02WPHQNFKPI\x02CT G\x02EQPUGTXGF\x02OGEJCPKUOU NKPMKPI\x02)2%4\x02DKPFKPI\x02VQ\x02)&2\x02T GNGCUG)2%4\x02 )/uni03B1\x15Z\x16\x18 \x19Z\x17\x15\x02 \x18Z\x15\x19\x02.KICPF\x0f DKPFKPI\x02ET CFNG Fig. 3 | Conserved residue contact networks between class A GPCRs and G proteins.  The G protein- coupled receptor (GPCR) and the G protein have been depicted in grey in  cartoon and surface representations. Binding of ligands near the ligand- binding cradle in  the receptor triggers distinct conformational changes in different receptor regions  (schematically represented as black circles). These changes converge near the effector-   binding region of the receptor through a conserved rewiring of non- covalent contacts  among key receptor residues (represented as circles and labelled according to GPCR  Database nomenclature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Engagement of these residues exposes receptor regions  capable of recognizing a conserved G protein selectivity barcode (a pattern of amino  acids specific to a given G protein; shown as a barcode logo). Binding to the receptor  triggers a universal G protein allosteric mechanism that uncouples interactions between the 1 helix (H1), the 5 helix (H5) and the GDP- binding site of the G  subunit and leads  to GDP release. This allows GDP exchange for GTP and activation of the G protein. Connections between residues reflect inactivating (orange lines) and activating (green lines) contacts between them. Green dashed lines indicate that activation signals do not occur through direct contact. GPCR kinases (grKs). g protein- coupled  receptor (gPCr)-regulating  protein kinases that  phosphorylate intracellular  receptor sites and modulate  the ability of gPCrs to interact  with g proteins and other  intracellular transducers. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 6, 'content': 'T ransducer mimetic A non- functional protein such  as a camelid nanobody that  binds within the transducer-   binding cleft of an activated receptor to induce structural  reorganization of the receptor  similar to that induced by  functional transducers (for  example, g proteins). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': 'interactions with receptors that can prime the receptor  for activation60,61. Such data also provide evidence that,  besides the conserved deep binding of the 5 helix of  the G subunit into the receptor core, other important  interactions between the receptor and the G protein can be established. Nonetheless, this conserved, deep inter - action between the GPCR and the G protein is likely  required for G protein activation, as it contributes to  the allosteric conformational changes required for full nucleotide exchange 62,63. The expanding availability of solved receptor struc - tures and their complexes with signal transducers has also allowed a more systematic analysis of recep-tortransducer coupling and of how downstream Gproteins are activated. Analysis of receptor- bound  and unbound G proteins, together with a detailed inves-tigation of sequence conservation among G subunits, has helped elucidate a universal allosteric mechanism for G activation by GPCRs 62 (Fig. 3). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': 'This was further  facilitated by the development of a common G subu- nit numbering (CGN) system that allows identification  of equivalent residues across the different G proteins62.  G proteins contain a RAS domain (named for its  homology to the small G protein RAS). Short segments  within this domain undergo disorder- to-order tran- sitions as part of the G protein activation mechanism (initially described for the activation of RAS), and these  changes could provide a mechanism that is compatible  with conserved allosteric activation pathways and the selective binding of the G protein to specific recep-tor types. In more detail, following recruitment to the  receptor, the carboxy-  terminal part of the 5 helix in  the G sub  unit adopts a more ordered helical structure,  which is required to expose residues responsible for the  tight and specific binding of different G subtypes to  theGPCR. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Molecular dynamics simulations indicate  that removal of GDP from G subunits is sufficient to allow this helical ordering of the 5 helix 63 and suggest  that nucleotide release precedes full engagement of   the G protein by the receptor. Indeed, in the inactive Gprotein, GDP is in direct contact with the 5 helix and also with the 1 helix. The 1 helix is allosterically linked to nucleotide release via an increase in flexibility  resulting from the disorder- to-order transition of the  5 helix described above. Thus, recruitment of the G  protein to the GPCR could drive GDP release mediated by allosteric effects from the receptor, and this in turn  could allow subsequent full engagement of receptor and  G protein through the rearrangement of 5 helix. This might potentially explain how the GPCRG system can be so diverse while conserving a common allosteric  activation mechanism across the different G proteins 62. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': ' Recent studies have also sought a structural explanation for why particular receptors have the ability to couple  to some G protein types and not others, a question that until recently had remained elusive. A detailed sequence and structural analysis of human GPCRs and G proteins  revealed the existence of patterns of amino acids, termed  G protein selectivity barcodes, on each of the 16 human G proteins that can be recognized by distinct regions on the approximately 800 human receptors. Importantly,  some of the positions in the barcode are highly conserved, whereas others are unique to the individual  G proteins. While the highly conserved positions in the selectivity barcode allow the receptors to bind and acti- vate G proteins in a similar manner, the unique positions  are recognized by specific receptors through distinct res-idues, and only some barcodes can be recognized by any given receptor. This situation could be compared with  a scenario of having multiple keys (receptors) opening  the same lock (G protein) using non- identical patterns. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': ' Furthermore, it was shown that studying the evolution-ary history of GPCRs allows the identification of these  selectivity- determining residues on the receptor 20. Beyond G protein engagement, there is increasing evi- dence, at least for class A GPCRs, that the conformation  of TM7 and, in particular, that of its conserved NPXXY (in single letter amino acid code, where X is any amino acid) motif can contribute to the efficiency of arrestin  coupling and activation and consequently to the observed  signalling bias between agonists 21,6466. This is supported  by spectroscopy studies of 2-AR in complex with ago- nists with divergent pharmacology, particularly those that  activate both G protein and arrestin signalling and those biased towards arrestin recruitment 67. In that study, in the  absence of transducer, G protein- competent and arrestin-   competent ligands altered conformations of both TM6 and TM7, whereas those that exhibited limited G protein engagement and favoured arrestin- mediated signalling  primarily altered only the TM7 conformation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Similarly,  the differential recruitment of arrestin to - OR versus   - OR by the ligand 3-iodobenzoyl naltrexamine (IBNtxA)  could be altered by mutation of a key residue in TM7   (Y/W7.35; single amino acid code numbered according to the   Ballesteros and Weinstein class A numbering scheme 68).  This mutation induced subtle changes in ligand orientation across the two receptors, suggesting that this difference  in ligand- binding pose, and in the strength of chemical  bonds between ligand and receptor, is sufficient to alter key components of the intramolecular allosteric networks  within the receptor that govern selective signalling 69.   A role for TM7 conformational changes has also been proposed for the differential engagement of transducers  by 5HT1B and 5HT2B stimulated by a promiscuous ago-nist ergotamine. This ligand activated both G protein and arrestin pathways downstream from 5HT1B and primarily  activated arrestin-  mediated signalling downstream from  5HT2B. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 7, 'content': 'In this case, a key difference was the extent of  conformational change to TM7  (reF.65). Additional insights  into mechanisms governing arrestin recruitment arise  from the crystal structure of 5HT2B bound to lysergic acid  diethylamide (LSD), whereby a single point mutation in extracellular loop 2 (ECL2; connecting TM4 and TM5) that reduced interaction with LSD and increased ligand  off- rate markedly attenuated arrestin recruitment 70,71.  Interestingly, combining this knowledge with previous information on biased agonism at dopaminergic receptors  allowed the identification of a set of polypharmacological compounds exhibiting - arrestin bias 72. It is known that differentially phosphorylated  carboxy- terminal peptides that mimic phosphorylated  receptor carboxy- terminal tails can induce distinct  arrestin conformations in regions responsible for pro-tein scaffolding 73,74. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'for bias may be related to ligand- specific differences  in coupling of the receptorligand complex with dif- ferent kinases, which in turn alter patterns of receptor  carboxy-  terminal phosphorylation (phosphorylation  barcode). Very recent work has shed additional light on the complex relationship between phosphoryla- tion of the receptor carboxy- terminal tail and arrestin  recruitment, with evidence for allosteric modulation of  the receptor core by the phospho- carboxy-terminal tail,  which regulated arrestin binding to the core of 2-AR 52.  Many GRKs require interaction with the  subunit of  the G protein, providing a potential explanation as to  why arrestin signalling requires G protein binding to the receptor. Notably, ligating the same phosphopeptide to different class A GPCRs has been shown to elicit distinct  effects on arrestin engagement with the receptor 75. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'These  differences in arrestin engagement by phosphorylated receptors could be explained by the fact that at least two  major conformations exist for arrestinGPCR inter - actions: a tail conformation and a core conformation, which differ for different arrestinGPCR pairs. The tail  conformation arises from interaction of arrestin with the  phosphorylated carboxy- terminal tail of the GPCR 76 and  is compatible with concomitant GPCRG protein inter - action77. In the core conformation, in addition to the  interaction with the tail, arrestin establishes interactions  with the receptor core through a finger loop domain, as  illustrated by the rhodopsinarrestin crystal structure76.  These two conformations have been linked to specific functions of arrestins (arrestin in tail conformation was  shown to be functional in GPCR internalization and some forms of signalling, whereas receptor desensitiza-tion was attributed to the core conformation) 49. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'It will be  important to understand the extent to which the recep- tor carboxyl tail (or intracellular loops) undergoes struc- tural reorganization upon phosphorylation to influence both receptor and transducer conformations. Currently, these regions are often excluded from structural analyses  to limit receptor flexibility, although recent work with  minimally modified class B GPCRs 43,78,79 indicates that  the receptor carboxyl tail is conformationally dynamic,  at least in a G protein- bound state. Most studies that link protein structure to biased ago - nism have been limited to the primary G protein trans- ducer of the target receptor and arrestin recruitment, and  this limits our understanding of the spectrum of ligand-   mediated conformational switching that contributes to  biased signalling. As a consequence, there has recently been substantial interest in developing multiplexed  approaches to interrogate changes to GPCR function  (Box 1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The power of using a broader range of measures  of GPCR function is illustrated by a recent study that combined evolutionary trace analysis to predict, and  subsequently mutate, 28 amino acids in the 2-AR that may be involved in the distinct conformational networks that govern biased signalling 66. Through assessment of  constitutive and agonist- induced G protein recruitment,  G protein activation, arrestin recruitment and receptor endocytosis, this work provided additional evidence for the predominant importance of conserved motifs in TM7 in the differential ability of 2-AR to engage  different transducers.Class B GPCRs. Class A GPCRs display considerable  diversity in the size and architecture of their amino-   terminal extracellular domains (ECDs). By contrast,  class B1 peptide hormone GPCRs share ECDs that are  approximately 100150 amino acids in length and form a conserved 3D fold that binds the carboxy- terminal  segment of activating peptide ligands 80. Recent struc- tural studies have provided major advances in our  understanding of the activation of class B1 GPCRs and  first insights into the mechanisms that can contribute to biased agonism. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'These receptors are maintained in inactive states by a series of conserved, polar, hydrogen-   bonded amino acid networks at the base of the receptor, which are observed in inactive state structures of the iso-lated TMD 8184 (Fig. 4a). Additionally, there is evidence  that domaindomain interaction between the amino-   terminal ECD and the transmembrane receptor core may support receptor quiescence 85,86. In the past year, multiple structures containing both  the ECD and the transmembrane core have been solved, including receptor complexes with an inhibitory antibody87  and partial agonists88,89 as well as three structures of full-   length receptors in complex with both peptide agonists  and the heterotrimeric Gs protein43,78,79, making this  the richest receptor class for fully active, G protein-   bound structures. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Comparison of TMDs of the inactive   state structures with the agonistreceptorG protein-   bound structures of the calcitonin receptor (CTR)78 and  glucagon- like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor (GLP-1R)43,79  revealed common large- scale changes in the trans- membrane core architecture upon binding of peptide  agonists. These included marked kinking and an out-ward movement of the extracellular ends of TM6 and TM7 and an inward movement of the extracellular top  of TM1. These changes are unique to class B GPCRs,  but as observed for class A GPCRs, they are translated into the outward movement of TM6 at the base of the receptor. This event is conserved across all GPCR classes  and allows accommodation of the 5 helix of G. These  large- scale changes occur around conserved class B1  motifs, including the Pro 6.47bXXGly6.50b (superscript  numbers refer to the class B GPCR transmembrane core  numbering system90) in TM6, Gly7.50b in TM7 and Gly1.46b  in TM1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Comparison of fully active, G protein- bound GLP-1R  with the recent structure of the related glucagon receptor  (GCGR) bound to a partial agonist, in the absence of   G protein88, may provide clues to the sequence of confor - mational changes that are required for G protein engage- ment for class B GPCRs. In the partial agonistGCGR  structure, the receptor displays only a subset of the transmembrane core changes observed in the G protein-   bound structures. Specifically, while there is a reorgan- ization of ECL1 and ECL2 and an outward movement  of TM6 to accommodate peptide binding, TM1 and TM7 are not kinked, and the base of the receptor over - laps with the structure observed for inactive receptors.  While we do not yet understand the sequence of events  that drive full receptor activation, structures of GLP-1R bound to an 11-mer peptide agonist 89 and an allosteric  inhibitor84 provide additional clues as to the minimal  conformational changes that may allow adoption of a Inhibitory antibody An antibody directed against a  g protein- coupled receptor  that inhibits receptor activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'fully active state. Each of these latter structures exhibits  key features of the fully active state in the organization  of the extracellular segment of the receptor core, includ- ing reorganization of ECL2, outward movement of TM6 and TM7 and inward movement of TM1. Both struc-tures were modified in key transmembrane segments to  allow receptor stabilization and crystallization. In the  GLP-1 R inhibitor- bound structure, a disulfide bond was introduced between TM6 and TM5, which resulted in the breaking of interactions that stabilize the inac- tive state, implying that this breakage may be sufficient  to drive structural change in the absence of other con-straints. In the 11-mer- agonist-bound structure, the  ProXXGly motif in TM6 had been mutated, and this  may also contribute to mimicry of the fully active state of  the upper half of the receptor core. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'It is likely that there is a coordinated series of interactions between the peptide and receptor and between the receptor and the G protein  (or other transducer) that are allosterically transmitted  between the intracellular and extracellular domains and allow adoption of the fully active state. These tran-sitions are consistent with the loose allosteric coupling  described above for class A GPCRs and correspond  well with biophysical observations of conformational changes associated with agonistreceptor, receptorG protein and full agonistreceptorG protein complexes  in class A GPCRs 5,21. The current general model for class B GPCR activa- tion can be summarized as follows: after initial binding  of peptide agonists, there is reorganization of receptor ECLs, which accommodates peptide binding to the receptor core and contributes to propagation of confor - mational change that is linked to both receptor activation and biased agonism 43,91,92. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Within the core of the receptor,  there is reorganization of a conserved central network  of polar amino acids, and mutational data support a   subtle role for this network in peptide- specific signal  bias93. Below this network, towards the intracellular face  of the receptor, are hydrophobic residues that stabilize both the inactive and the active (G protein- complexed)  states, although these processes occur via distinct inter - actions. Receptor activation is associated with breakage  of key polar networks at the base of the receptor; this  is required for TM6 movement and G protein interac- tion 43,78,79,94,95 (Fig. 4a). The dynamics underlying these  conformational changes are not currently understood.  However, mutational data support a role for redistribu- tion of conserved, polar or tightly packed small amino acids in this transition 90. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The recent structures of the  GLP-1R bound to its primary physiological ligand, GLP-1   (reF.79), or the biased agonist exendin- P5 (reF.43) have also  provided new insight into the structural basis of efficacy  and biased signalling at this receptor, revealing key dif- ferences in the conformation of ECL3 and the top of   TM1 of the receptor, when bound by the different ligands. Intriguingly, all G protein- complexed structures  solved to date exist in monomeric forms. However, there is robust evidence that class B1 GPCRs undergo both homodimerization and heterodimerization and that this is functionally important, as disruption of dimeriza- tion is associated with reduced agonist potency for canon- ical G s coupling with the receptor80. Dimerization may  also contribute to the biased profiles of agonists96 and to  alteration of cellular response to agonists in select class B   receptor heterodimers97,98, though this has not yet been  extensively investigated. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': "The limited data suggest that   the receptors are dimeric upon initial interaction with the   ligand, which contributes to high- affinity binding, but  that these dimers are destabilized upon activation and G protein interaction, which may favour preferential  6/\x17 /uni03B3/uni03B2/uni03B1 )&2 C\x02\x02%NCUU\x02$\x02)2%4U D\x02\x02%NCUU\x02%\x02)2%4U+PCEVKXG +PCEVKXG #EVKXG#EVKXG .KICPF\x0fDKPFKPI RQEMGV\x02TGUKFWGU %GPVTCN\x02RQNCT PGVYQTM *[FTQRJQDKE PGVYQTM %[VQRNCUOKE J[FTQIGP\x02DQPF PGVYQTMU 6/\x17 6/\x18 6/\x186/\x136/\x13'ZGPFKP\x0f2\x17 6/\x196/\x19 *\x1a *\x1a 8(61TVJQUVGTKE CIQPKUV1WVYCTF\x02OQXGOGPV UWRRQTVKPI\x02)\x02RT QVGKP\x02DKPFKPI %QPHQTOCVKQPCN QUEKNNCVKQPU %NQUGF 1RGP Fig. 4 | Conformational changes in class B and class C GPCRs required for G protein  coupling. a | The inactive homology model of glucagon- like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R),  based on the inactive structure of the related glucagon receptor (left) and active,  exendin- P5-bound GLP-1R structure40 (right), highlighting key amino acid side chains  that undergo reorganization during activation transition. These are grouped according to their function and displayed in distinct colours. Prominently , polar, hydrogen- bonded  interactions at the base of the receptor are broken or reorganized in the active state. ", 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Clear differences in the organization of the hydrophobic network can also be observed between the inactive and active receptor structure. Class B G protein- coupled receptor  (GPCR) activation is also associated with conserved changes in the orientation of transmembrane (TM) helices, an outward movement of the extracellular ends of TM6 and TM7 and an inward movement of the extracellular end of TM1. These changes culminate  in an outward movement of TM6 at the cytosolic side, which supports accommodation of  the transducer. b | A schematic of class C GPCR activation. These receptors are  functionally dimeric (homodimer form shown) and bind ligand (green circle) via the large extracellular venus fly trap (VFT) domain. Notably , the VFT domain spontaneously  oscillates between open and closed conformations. Agonist binding leads to conformational changes in the VFT domain that support the closed conformation of the VFT , and these alterations are linked to repositioning of the TM domain bundles from the two receptor subunits towards each other. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 9, 'content': 'As a result, these transitions induce an  asymmetric conformational change in one protomer that enables G protein binding.   The structural details behind these transitions are not known. The purple circles indicate  cysteines in the TM bundle or cysteine- rich linker domain. H8, helix 8. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'isolation of the monomeric receptorG protein complex  in structural studies9,80,99. Class C GPCRs. Unlike many other GPCR families, class C GPCRs are obligate dimers, and this is critically linked to their activation 100102. For example, the GABA  type B receptor is an obligate heterodimer with one sub- unit providing the agonist- binding site and the other  providing the G protein- binding domain103. Class C  receptors contain very large extracellular domains that comprise a structurally conserved venus fly trap (VFT)  module, which acts as the endogenous ligand- binding  site, and an interconnecting domain that is contiguous with the TMD. VFT modules exhibit varying complex- ity depending on receptor subtype. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Orthosteric agonist  binding to the VFT domain engenders a conformational shift of the VFT module from an open to closed state, which in turn provides marked alteration to the position  and orientation of the TMDs within the receptor dimer  that trigger transducer binding 104 (Fig. 4b). FRET studies  of conformational dynamics within mGluRs have indi- cated that the VFT domains can spontaneously oscillate  between the resting (open) and active (closed) orienta-tions and that agonists of different efficacies distinctly alter this equilibrium 104, which serves as a mechanism  driving receptor activation. To date, no structures of  full- length receptors are available, and the nature of the   interaction between TMDs of the dimer that contrib- ute to receptor activation is still unclear. However, for mGluR2, cysteine disulfide bridging of the TM4 TM5 interface of the dimer subunits prevents agonist-   mediated activation, while TM6TM6 crosslinking  engenders a constitutively active receptor 101, which is  consistent with reorganization of the dimeric interface  as part of the activation mechanism. Of note, both posi- tive and negative modulators that bind in the TMD have been identified for most class C receptors 105. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'In the full-   length receptor, most positive modulators lack intrin- sic efficacy, though they can activate amino- terminally  truncated receptors lacking the ECD, implying that the  ECD contributes to maintenance of an inactive state. Nonetheless, such modulators can modify the profile  of orthosteric agonist signalling, as has been observed  for CASR 106. This observation indicates that, in class  C receptors, similar to other classes of GPCR, the  allosteric modulators alter conformational sampling of  the receptor during activation transition80,107. Local control of GPCR signalling Our understanding of GPCR signalling has also bene-fited from an evolution in appreciation of the impor - tance of the receptor location within the cell and the role of the environmental context within each location  (Fig. 5). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'This local control can include lateral allostery  via interaction with membrane lipids and changes to  lipid composition108 113 and recruitment of the receptor  into protein signalosome  complexes that restrict or alter  effector and regulator interactions with the receptor and thereby the signalling effect 4,114. Moreover, receptor loca- tion can also influence the functional selectivity of ago-nists of differing physicochemical properties, whereby  hydrophilic compounds require cell surface expression of receptors to act but lipophilic compounds may access spatially restricted receptors located within the cell, as  has been demonstrated for 1-AR 23. Membrane composition. While we commonly refer to  the receptor environment as a lipid bilayer and have pre-sumed that the plasma membrane is the key signalling domain, physiological membranes can be very com- plex, containing up to 1,000 different types of lipid 115,116  that can interact directly with receptors and can also be assembled into microdomains through interactions  with membrane proteins (the most common being caveolins to form caveolae). Such microdomains can be enriched with specific transducers, including G protein  subtypes 117. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Differences in lipid composition also alter  membrane curvature, which in turn may influence GPCR conformational dynamics 118. Notably, GPCRs  can dynamically partition between such microdomains, leading to alterations in signalling, and this can con- tribute to observed differences in drug behaviour. An   important example is the - OR, as compartmentalization  of this receptor within distinct plasma membrane sub - domains has a key role in the distinct  pharmacological  response of drugs 24. Receptor trafficking. GPCRs undergo cycles of dynamic trafficking through different cellular compartments. This aspect is also regulated by ligand- dependent inter - actions as part of desensitization of specific signalling  transducers and adoption of alternative signalling  engagement, as well as downregulation of receptor response, which is accomplished by targeting recep-tors to degradative pathways. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'The rates of spontaneous  and ligand- dependent trafficking of receptors between  different membrane compartments are coordinated by   the selective interaction of receptors with the reper - toire of sorting and transporting machineries. Notably, receptor trafficking rates show great variability among  GPCRs and can be differentially altered with distinct ligands 119 123. These trafficking events are controlled by  conformational sampling of receptor states (and subse- quent events including post- translational modifications  such as phosphorylation, palmitoylation and ubiqui- tylation) and have been shown to be specific to ligand concentration,  chemotype  and residency time119 123. Not  surprisingly, even in the absence of intracellular signal- ling, agonist- selective differences in the rate and extent  of receptor trafficking can alter the pattern of cellular  response and constitute a component of the pharma - cological profile of drugs that contributes to observed  cellular efficacy. Assembly of signalosomes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Although we have under - stood for many years that GPCRs and other proteins  can assemble into multi- protein complexes and that  this can alter observed receptor function and cellular  response (explicitly exemplified by the signalling at the neuronal synapse), our appreciation of the importance  of these events for concepts such as biased agonism is  only recently being realized 4. The simplest assembly  unit comprises receptor dimers or oligomers, and this  has been discussed extensively elsewhere124, 125. It is Protein signalosome A spatially restricted group of  transducers and/or regulatory  proteins that jointly produce a  specific signalling output. Chemotype A chemical description of a molecule that allows  identification of the similarities  and differences in chemical  structure compared with other  molecules. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': 'worth noting that heteromeric assembly of receptors can  alter transducer engagement or receptor trafficking in  response to physiological ligands125,126 and that dynamic  changes of one of the receptor partners could contrib - ute to either disease or disease treatment. GPCRs can  also interact with non- GPCR partners to alter ligand  recognition, transducer engagement and activation, or receptor trafficking. This includes the interaction of  GPCRs with scaffolding proteins such as AKAPs and  other proteins 35,7,103, which are recognized scaffolds  for multi- protein assembly that provide fine control  of signalling (see below). GPCRs can also interact   with membrane proteins such as receptor activity-   modifying proteins (RAMPs)33, melanocortin receptor-   accessory proteins (MRAPs)34 and low- density  lipoprotein (LDL) receptor- related proteins (LRP)127. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': ' RAMPs, a family of three single- pass transmembrane  proteins, exemplify the spectrum of effects that can be engendered by such interacting proteins. RAMPs were originally recognized for their prerequisite role in trafficking of functional calcitonin receptor- like  receptor (CALCRL)RAMP1 heterodimers (CGRP) or adrenomedullin receptors (CALCRLRAMP2 or CALCRLRAMP3 heterodimers) to the cell surface, con-tributing to both escape of CALCRL from the Golgi appa- ratus and/or endoplasmic reticulum and the formation of  the ligand- binding pocket of these receptors 128. RAMPs  are now recognized as broad partners of GPCRs, includ- ing those from all major subfamilies32,33. While not widely  required for cell surface expression of GPCRs, RAMPs can alter receptor regulation, ligand specificity and the  pattern of transducer engagement 33. As RAMPs, and  other interacting proteins, are dynamically regulated in  normal physiology and in disease, the impact of these  GPCR partners on receptor function must be considered in drug screening and development strategies. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Overall, assembly of GPCRs into signalosomes can  provide the cell with very fine control of signalling events and has been correlated with spatially restricted signalling 114, 129 132, very high sensitivity of response133  and control of specificity of transducer coupling103,134,135  (Fig. 5). This latter property in particular should be  considered in the translation of biased agonist profiles  measured in receptors expressed via recombinant pro- tein expression systems versus those exhibited in target cells in whole organs (healthy and diseased). Moreover, the assembly of GPCRs into signalosome complexes is  likely to alter their conformational sampling, with the  potential for such interactions to allosterically regu-late ligand binding, downstream signalling and other regulatory mechanisms, as has been observed with   RAMPGPCR interactions 33. Physiological consequences of compartmentalized signalling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': 'The potential for GPCRs to signal from  intracellular compartments has been traditionally asso-ciated with arrestin- dependent receptor internalization  and recruitment of G protein- independent transducers  to endocytosed receptors. However, phenomena such as persistent activation of G protein- dependent path- ways have alluded to a role for G protein signalling  from sites beyond the plasma membrane 136. Advances  in tools to localize components of signalling complexes have led to the detection of transducer activation within  different cellular subdomains, and there is evidence of signalling, apart from endosomes after endocytosis, also from sites including secretory compartments   (the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus), the nucleus and mitochondria 137 142. Moreover, exper - iments to selectively intervene with signalling from  intracellular compartments have demonstrated that this  signalling is physiologically important and can be poten-tially targeted therapeutically, with prominent examples for the 2-AR 141, NK-1 receptor (NK-1R; also known  as TACR1)143, CGRP144 and PTH1R136,142. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': "Intriguingly,  crosstalk between receptors can drive changes in com- partmentalized signalling, with a recent example of tran- sient activation of 2-AR, via G subunits, modulating prolonged endosomal PTH1R signalling 145. Alterations to physiologically important compart- mentalization of signalling are likely to be disease causing or disease modifying, as has been demonstrated for -   ARs in heart failure 129,130,146 and melanocortin receptor 4  (MC4-R) in some genetic forms of obesity134. For exam- ple, the spatial restriction of 2-AR (and consequent #TTGUVKP #TTGUVKP #TTGUVKP/KETQFQOCKPU  HQT\x02GZCORNG\x0e ECXGQNCG\x02QT NKRKF\x02TCHVU\x0b$CTTKGTU$WHHGTKPI2NCUOC\x02OGODT CPG\x02UKIPCNNKPI +PVGTPCNK\\CVKQP 2JQURJQT[NCVKQP .QECN\x02EQPUWORVKQP QH\x02VJG\x02FQY PUVTGCO UKIPCN\x02 HQT\x02GZCORNG\x0e E#/2\x02FGIT CFCVKQP\x02D[ RJQURJQFKGUVGT CUGU\x0b.CVGTCN CNNQUVGT[2NCUOC OGODTCPG 'PFQUQOCN UKIPCNNKPI5KIPCNNKPI\x02HT QO\x02QVJGT KPVTCEGNNWNCT\x02UKVGU  HQT\x02GZCORNG\x0e\x02)QNIK\x0b5KIPCNQUQOG Fig. 5 | Compartmentalization of signalling by GPCRs. ", 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Signalling by G protein- coupled   receptors (GPCRs) can be spatially (and temporally) compartmentalized to encode  unique responses at the cellular level. This is facilitated by the formation of higher order protein complexes (signalosomes) around GPCRs and through the signalling of GPCRs at multiple locations within the cell  apart from the canonical signalling initiated at the plasma membrane, GPCRs can signal from endosomes after receptor internalization. They can also be activated by membrane- permeable ligands from intracellular organelles  (including endosomes and the Golgi apparatus). The composition of the lipid bilayer can also influence GPCR signalling. For example, localization of receptors and their signalling  partners into microdomains (such as caveolae or lipid rafts) can physically influence their  conformation and signalling output through interactions with lipids and membrane proteins that are enriched in these domains (lateral allostery). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Spatial and temporal dynamics can also be regulated by physical barriers, such as the cytoskeleton, and by biochemical buffering. An example of this latter process is the buffering of GPCR-   dependent G s- mediated cAMP production, whereby discretely positioned  phosphodiesterases degrade cAMP , acting as local cAMP sinks. This buffering can occur at various sites within the cell, including at the plasma membrane and the endosomes, to control cAMP diffusion and to create discrete cAMP gradients within a cell. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'cAMP signalling) to the deep transverse tubules   of healthy cardiomyocytes is disrupted in a rat model of   chronic heart failure, leading to diffuse pathologi- cal cAMP signalling13. Moreover, the selective ability  of individual ligands of a receptor to regulate recep- tor transitions between compartments (for example,  between different cellular compartments or between plasma membrane microdomains) may contribute to the observed biased agonist profiles 24,147. Translational considerations Taken together, the aforementioned advances in GPCR structural biology have contributed to a more  nuanced picture of the influence of ligand, recep- tor and signal transducer structural determinants on signalling and ligand efficacy. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Importantly, these structural insights have pointed to novel ways to mod- ulate GPCRs in a more refined manner, thus paving  the way for the development of new chemical biology tools to interrogate receptor function and, most impor - tantly, for the development of a new generation of   drug candidates. Understanding the impact of ligandreceptor kinetics  on receptor signalling. Although not explicitly elabo - rated in this Review, many of the receptortransducer   interaction and transducer activation properties described above are a consequence of the kinetics of ligandreceptor interaction, ligand residency and the  consequent probability of transducer or regulatory pro- tein engagement. This is a component of the selective, bi- molecular interaction between individual ligands and  target receptors and has become an increasing focus of  some therapeutic drug development programmes.  Not surprisingly, the classification of observed biased agonism can change depending on the temporal reso-lution of the functional readout of signalling, and this  also provides potential rationalization for discrepancy  in ligand classification between different laboratories 22. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': ' Ligand residency, in particular, has become an area of  focus in understanding pharmacological differentiation  of compounds, and kinetics of ligandreceptor interac-tion have been linked to signalling efficacy, pleiotropy (including arrestin recruitment) and clinical efficacy of  compounds 22,71,148 150. Identification and progression of biased agonists  in drug pipelines. A key lesson from the increasingly detailed molecular insights into GPCR behaviour and consequences of their interaction with drugs is that  GPCR signalling is complex and that, consequently,  drug discovery and development for these receptors is challenging. Biased agonism can be detected with, at a minimum, two measures of cellular function (that  is, by monitoring the activity of two independent sig- nalling outputs), but understanding the nature of the signalling bias of a drug and its contribution to disease modulation requires an understanding of the path- ways linked to both the desired therapeutic efficacy  and potential side effects 151. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'At best, we currently have  only partial understanding of therapeutic signalling.  So how do we progress? The answer is multi- pronged. There are increasingly sophisticated studies using  mice with chemogenetically modified receptors  or light-   modulated receptors ( optogenetics ) to specifically alter  receptor signalling and to try to dissect key physiolog- ical and pathophysiological responses to such altered  signalling142 155. These types of study can determine   key signalling components that may be selectively tar - geted (either activated or deactivated) and they can be further adopted to models of disease progression. In fact, invivo studies using different disease models have already started to shed light on the relative contribution  of selected receptor pathways to therapeutic effects. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Some  efforts in this direction include the characterization of - arrestin 2-biased ligands for type 1 angiotensin II   receptor in mouse models of cardiomyopathy 156,157 and  the invivo analysis of analgesic and side- effect profiles of  G protein biased compounds in - OR158 and - OR159,160.  Importantly, a study systematically analysing a collection  of differentially biased ligands of - OR recently demon- strated a positive correlation between their degree of   G protein- mediated signalling over arrestin recruitment  (G protein bias) and the width of their therapeutic win-dow (the balance between therapeutic efficacy and side  effects), providing a framework for the development of therapeutics with improved clinical effect for this class of drugs 161. At the level of drug discovery, we can now  use our knowledge of receptor structure and dynamics,  the capacity to chemically modify the type of biased sig- nalling and the diversity of drug response to incorporate multiplexed and kinetic measurements of cellular func-tion to improve pharmacological clustering of chemo- types  (Box 1). Distinct pharmacological chemotypes can  then be empirically linked to desired invivo effects. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Such studies can be incorporated into decision points for drug  candidate selection. Understanding the impact of disease context on drug  action. Pathological states can modify cellular function,  including through alterations to the local environment  of receptors. One example is changes in membrane composition, which can be observed in metabolic dis- eases such as hyperlipidaemia, obesity and diabetes 162  and in disorders of the central nervous system includ-ing Alzheimer disease and schizophrenia 163. Events  such as hypoxia, pH changes and redox alterations and generalized inflammatory responses can all change the  local cellular environment and thus a potential drug response 164 168. One example where such changes occur  is the tumour microenvironment, which is frequently  acidic. Notably, GPCRs contain networks of residues  that can be protonated and are sensitive to altered pH, with alteration to these networks being consequential for receptor activation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 12, 'content': 'In particular, select GPCRs are  believed to function as proton sensors via alteration of  the protonation state of conserved negatively charged residues (such as D3.32 and D2.50 (using the class A GPCR numbering scheme 68)) as well as the charge of  buried histidines168,169 that could lead to altered recep- tor signalling in low pH environments. Alterations  to the levels of other ions should also be considered  when assessing GPCR signalling. Importantly, cations, such as Na +, are among the most ubiquitous allosteric Chemogenetically modified  receptors genetically engineered  receptors that can be  chemically modified to be able  to alter receptor signalling  properties. These include  receptors selected for their  capacity to interact with  previously unrecognized  ligands. Optogenetics A biophysical technique that  uses modified, light- activated  g protein- coupled receptors or  channels to control cells in  living tissue. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'modulators of GPCR function and contribute to recep- tor activity (quiescence versus constitutive activation)  and to the nature of biased signalling69,170, 171. As such,  the nature of GPCR responses to drugs could be altered dramatically in diverse disease contexts, resulting, for  example, in differences in transducer and regulatory protein engagement (that is, changing the observed bias profile of ligands). Moreover, most diseases are heteroge- neous and evolve as they progress. Therefore, using drug  interventions optimized for disease stage is an impor - tant component for translational success. More complex model systems that mimic the disease context are thus  important for understanding efficacy translation and  for establishing the extent to which clustering of drug behaviour in routine recombinant cell studies remains predictive of their behaviour under conditions of altered  cellular environment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Considering the impact of natural receptor variation  on GPCRdrug interaction. Other key considerations  that can influence drug discovery, development and  eventually translational success include the genetic var - iation of receptor sequences (polymorphisms) and the variability in receptor expression between individuals  in the human population. Several independent studies  have characterized the functional impact, including dif-ferential drug response, of a number of polymorphisms in a collection of receptor types 172 174. Importantly, a  recent study that comprehensively analysed genome  sequence data from 68,496 individuals showed that cur - rently drugged GPCRs present extensive genetic varia- tion within functional regions such as drug- binding and  transducer- binding sites19. Experimental follow- up of  - OR revealed that individuals with certain polymor - phisms had unexpected response to agonists, partial agonists and antagonists. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'For instance, polymorphisms at positions near the drug- binding pocket rendered a  gain of function effect, whereby an antagonist or par - tial agonist could elicit a full agonist response. Studies on cholecystokinin receptor type A further revealed that certain polymorphisms near the G protein- binding  region of this receptor completely altered the selectiv- ity profile of transducer coupling 19. Similarly, genetic  variation can alter receptor engagement with arrestins to impact receptor regulation and/or downstream sig- nalling as noted for CXC- chemokine receptor 4  (reF.175)  and vasopressin receptors176. Such altered or gain of func- tion effects can result in severe side effects of drugs and possibly life- threatening consequences. These findings  highlight the need to understand and characterize recep- tor variants that are prevalent in the human population  and consider them in the drug discovery pipeline. Such consideration should help limit failure of drugs during clinical trials, which can be both very expensive and time  consuming and may put patients at unnecessary risk. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': ' Characterizing variants of the current GPCR drug targets also has the potential to improve the precision of drug prescription by patient stratification into defined geno- typic groups with predicted drug responses. Such strat- ification would increase drug safety and efficacy and in consequence would improve the quality of life of patients  and relieve the economic and societal burden resulting  from non- optimal and/or ineffective drug action. Conclusions and perspectives Biased agonism is a fundamental property of GPCR ligands that can be used  serendipitously or constructively    for improved therapeutic targeting of these receptors. Consideration of this aspect of GPCR pharmacology will be key to achieving clinical drug efficacy and safety. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Our understanding of drug action is limited to what we  measure as a drug response, and high- resolution struc- tural insights into the control of GPCR conformation are  still at an early stage, providing limitations to conscious application of the principle of biased agonism in drug  design. Advances in structural approaches to understand  drugreceptor interaction and the increasing ability of researchers to analyse multiple signalling end points and to measure these events in real- time are progressively  enabling integration of a breadth of cellular signalling outcomes, and of the kinetic and spatial elements of GPCR signalling, into structure- based drug discovery.  This progress is expected to improve drug candidate  selection. Nonetheless, applying the biased agonist  properties of ligands for improvement of the therapeu-tic effect of new drugs will require an understanding of the expression of receptors and components of their  signalling pathways in different tissues and of the tissue-   specific and context- specific, integrated signalling that  differentiates beneficial from detrimental effects. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Given  this complexity, rational application of biased agonism  is expected to have the greatest impact on the treatment  of diseases for which pathological mechanisms are well characterized 177. Published online 13 August 2018 1. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. etal. Structured and disordered  facets of the GPCR fold. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 27,  129137 (2014). 2. Alexander, S. P . etal. The concise guide to pharmacology 2017/18: G protein- coupled receptors.  Br. J. Pharmacol. 174, S17S129 (2017). 3. Dunn, H. A. & Ferguson, S. S. G. PDZ protein regulation of G protein- coupled receptor trafficking and signaling  pathways. Mol. Pharmacol. 88, 624639 (2015). 4. Ellisdon, A. M. & Halls, M. L. Compartmentalization of GPCR signalling controls unique cellular responses.  Biochem. Soc. T rans. 44, 562567 (2016). 5. Hilger, D., Masureel, M. & Kobilka, B. K. Structure  and dynamics of GPCR signaling complexes.   Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 134 (2017). 6. Komolov, K. E. & Benovic, J. L. G protein- coupled  receptor kinases: past, present and future.   Cell. Signal. 41, 1724 (2018).7. Peterson, Y. K. & Luttrell, L. M. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': 'The diverse   roles of arrestin scaffolds in G proteincoupled  teceptor signaling. Pharmacol. Rev. 69, 256297  (2017). 8. Khan, S. M., Sung, J. Y. & Hbert, T . E. G  subunits   different spaces, different faces. Pharmacol. Res.   111, 434441 (2016). 9. Furness, S. G. B. etal. Ligand- dependent modulation  of G protein conformation alters drug efficacy. Cell   167, 739749 (2016).   This study demonstrates that differential   ligandreceptor conformations propagate to   G proteins to control efficacy and that this  propagation could contribute to biased   agonism. 10. Gregorio, G. G. etal. Single- molecule analysis of  ligand efficacy in  2ARG- protein activation. Nature   547, 6873 (2017).11. Paek, J. etal. Multidimensional tracking   of GPCR signaling via peroxidase- catalyzed   proximity labeling. Cell 169, 338349   (2017). 12. Sokolina, K. etal. Systematic proteinprotein  interaction mapping for clinically relevant human  GPCRs. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 918 (2017). 13. Smith, J. S., Lefkowitz, R. J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 13, 'content': '& Rajagopal, S. Biased  signalling: from simple switches to allosteric  microprocessors. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 17,   243260 (2018). 14. Ranjan, R., Dwivedi, H., Baidya, M., Kumar, M. & Shukla, A. K. Novel structural insights into GPCR -  arrestin interaction and signaling. T rends Cell Biol.   27, 851862 (2017). 15. Grundmann, M. etal. Lack of beta- arrestin signaling  in the absence of active G proteins. Nat. Commun. 9,  341 (2018). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': '16. T th, A. D. etal. Heterologous phosphorylation-   induced formation of a stability lock permits regulation  of inactive receptors by  - arrestins. J. Biol. Chem.   293, 876892 (2018). 17. Sriram, K. & Insel, P. A. GPCRs as targets for approved  drugs: how many targets and how many drugs?   Mol. Pharmacol. 93, 251258 (2018). 18. Hauser, A. S., Attwood, M. M., Rask- Andersen, M.,  Schith, H. B. & Gloriam, D. E. T rends in GPCR drug  discovery: new agents, targets and indications. Nat.  Rev. Drug Discov. 16, 829842 (2017). 19. Hauser, A. S. etal. Pharmacogenomics of GPCR drug  targets. Cell 172, 4154 (2018).   This comprehensive study reveals that several GPCRs that are targeted by common drugs show  extensive genetic variation in the human population, suggesting that taking GPCR variants  into account when prescribing drugs would  minimize ineffective treatments, adverse reactions  and health- care expenses. 20. Flock, T . etal. Selectivity determinants of GPCR- G  protein binding. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Nature 545, 133 (2017).   This study reveals the existence of selectivity  barcodes on G proteins that are recognized by  GPCRs and lays the foundation for understanding  the molecular basis of G protein- coupling  specificity. 21. Latorraca, N. R., Venkatakrishnan, A. J. & Dror, R. O. GPCR dynamics: structures in motion. Chem. Rev.   117, 139155 (2017). 22. Klein Herenbrink, C. etal. The role of kinetic context  in apparent biased agonism at GPCRs. Nat. Commun.   7, 114 (2016).   This is the first detailed study on the role of  kinetics in GPCR biased agonism that highlights the importance of considering kinetic context in the design and interpretation of biased agonism. 23. Irannejad, R. etal. Functional selectivity of GPCR-   directed drug action through location bias. Nat. Chem.  Biol. 13, 799806 (2017). 24. Halls, M. L. etal. Plasma membrane localization of the  - opioid receptor controls spatiotemporal signaling.  Sci. Signal. 9, ra16 (2016). 25. Kenakin, T . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Theoretical aspects of GPCRligand complex pharmacology. Chem. Rev. 117, 420  (2017). 26. Burg, J. S. etal. Structural basis for chemokine recognition and activation of a viral G protein- coupled  receptor. Science 347, 11131117 (2015). 27. Zhang, B., Albaker, A., Plouffe, B., Lefebvre, C. &  Tiberi, M. Constitutive activities and inverse agonism in dopamine receptors. Adv. Pharmacol. 70, 175214  (2014). 28. Stamm, S., Gruber, S. B., Rabchevsky, A. G. &   Emeson, R. B. The activity of the serotonin receptor 2C  is regulated by alternative splicing. Hum. Genet. 136,  10791091 (2017). 29. Lebon, G., Warne, T . & T ate, C. G. Agonist- bound  structures of G protein- coupled receptors. Curr. Opin.  Struct. Biol. 22, 482490 (2012). 30. Jacobsen, S. E. etal. The GPRC6A receptor displays constitutive internalization and sorting to the slow  recycling pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 69106926  (2017). 31. Cooney, K. A., Molden, B. M., Kowalczyk, N. S., Russell, S. & Baldini, G. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Lipid stress inhibits  endocytosis of melanocortin-4 receptor from modified  clathrin- enriched sites and impairs receptor  desensitization. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 1773117745  (2017). 32. Barbash, S., Lorenzen, E., Persson, T ., Huber, T . & Sakmar, T . P . GPCRs globally coevolved with receptor  activity- modifying proteins, RAMPs. Proc. Natl Acad.  Sci. USA 114, 1201512020 (2017). 33. Hay, D. L. & Pioszak, A. A. Receptor activity- modifying  proteins (RAMPs): new insights and roles. Annu. Rev.  Pharmacol. T oxicol. 56, 469487 (2016). 34. Rouault, A. A. J., Srinivasan, D. K., Yin, T . C., Lee, A. A. & Sebag, J. A. Melanocortin receptor accessory  proteins (MRAPs): functions in the melanocortin  system and beyond. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1863,  24622467 (2017). 35. Mlleskov- Jensen, A. S., Oliveira, M. T ., Farrell, H. E.  & Davis- Poynter, N. Virus- encoded 7 transmembrane  receptors. Prog. Mol. Biol. T ransl Sci. 129, 353393  (2015). 36. Cheloha, R. W., Gellman, S. H., Vilardaga, J.-P . & Gardella, T . J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'PTH receptor-1 signalling  mechanistic  insights and therapeutic prospects. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 11, 712724 (2015). 37. Hannan, F. M., Olesen, M. K. & Thakker, R. V. Calcimimetic and calcilytic therapies for inherited disorders of the calcium- sensing receptor signalling  pathway. Br. J. Pharmacol. https://doi.org/10.1111/ bph.14086 (2017). 38. Zantomio, D. etal. Convergent evidence for mGluR5 in  synaptic and neuroinflammatory pathways implicated  in ASD. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 52, 172177  (2015). 39. Brown, L. S. & Ernst, O. P . Recent advances in biophysical studies of rhodopsins  oligomerization,  folding, and structure. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1865,  15121521 (2017). 40. Zrn, A. etal. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis of alpha 2a- adrenergic receptor activation  reveals distinct agonist- specific conformational  changes. Mol. Pharmacol. 75, 534541 (2009). 41. Maier- Peuschel, M. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'A fluorescence resonance  energy transfer- based M2 muscarinic receptor sensor  reveals rapid kinetics of allosteric modulation. J. Biol.  Chem. 285, 87938800 (2010). 42. Devost, D. etal. Conformational profiling of the AT1  angiotensin II receptor reflects biased agonism,   G protein coupling, and cellular context. J. Biol. Chem.   292, 54435456 (2017). 43. Liang, Y.-L. etal. Phase- plate cryo- EM structure of a  biased agonist- bound human GLP-1 receptor- Gs  complex. Nature 555, 121125 (2018).   This study provides the highest resolution cyro-   electron microscopy (cryo- EM) structure of a GPCR  to date and the first structure of a GPCR bound by  a biased peptide ligand. 44. Lee, M.-H. etal. The conformational signature of -arrestin2 predicts its trafficking and signalling  functions. Nature 531, 665668 (2016).   This study identifies distinct - arrestin 2  conformational signatures that reflect the diverse  functional roles of - arrestins. 45. Nuber, S. etal.  - Arrestin biosensors reveal a rapid,  receptor- dependent activation/deactivation cycle.  Nature 531, 661664 (2016). 46. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Busillo, J. M. etal. Site- specific phosphorylation of  CXCR4 is dynamically regulated by multiple kinases and results in differential modulation of CXCR4  signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 78057817 (2010). 47. Kim, J. etal. Functional antagonism of different G  protein- coupled receptor kinases for beta- arrestin- mediated angiotensin II receptor signaling. Proc. Natl  Acad. Sci. USA 102, 14421447 (2005). 48. Zidar, D. A., Violin, J. D., Whalen, E. J. & Lefkowitz, R. J.  Selective engagement of G protein coupled receptor  kinases (GRKs) encodes distinct functions of biased ligands. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 96499654  (2009). 49. Cahill, T . J. etal. Distinct conformations of GPCR -  arrestin complexes mediate desensitization, signaling, and endocytosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,  25622567 (2017). 50. Butcher, A. J. etal. Differential G- protein-coupled  receptor phosphorylation provides evidence for a signaling bar code. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 1150611518  (2011). 51. Nobles, K. N. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'etal. Distinct phosphorylation sites on  the 2-adrenergic receptor establish a barcode that  encodes differential functions of  - arrestin. Sci. Signal.   4, ra51 (2011). 52. Shiraishi, Y. etal. Phosphorylation- induced  conformation of  2-adrenoceptor related to arrestin  recruitment revealed by NMR. Nat. Commun. 9, 194  (2018). 53 . Katritch, V., Cherezov, V. & Stevens, R. C. Diversity and  modularity of G protein- coupled receptor structures.  T rends Pharmacol. Sci. 33, 1727 (2012). 54. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. etal. Molecular signatures of  G- protein-coupled receptors. Nature 494, 185194  (2013).   This work shows that, despite the very large diversity in the structure of class A GPCRs, there  are common sets of non- covalent contacts between  structurally equivalent residues that constitute the molecular signature of this GPCR class. 55. DeVree, B. T . etal. Allosteric coupling from G protein  to the agonist- binding pocket in GPCRs. Nature 535,  182186 (2016). 56. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Venkatakrishnan, A. J. etal. Diverse activation pathways  in class A GPCRs converge near the G-protein-coupling region. Nature 40, 383388 (2016).   This is a systematic analysis of GPCR structures that reveals conserved interaction networks and  characteristic features of GPCR binding and  conformational changes upon activation. 57. Dror, R. O. etal. Activation mechanism of the  2-adrenergic receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA   108, 1868418689 (2011).  This study provides long- timescale, atomic- level  simulations that reveal the dynamics associated with activation of a GPCR as it transitions between  multiple conformational states. 58. Nygaard, R. etal. The dynamic process of 2-adrenergic receptor activation. Cell 152, 532542  (2013). 59. Manglik, A. etal. Structural insights into the dynamic process of  2-adrenergic receptor signaling. Cell 161,  11011111 (2015). 60. Malik, R. U., Dysthe, M., Ritt, M., Sunahara, R. K. & Sivaramakrishnan, S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'ER/K linked GPCR- G protein  fusions systematically modulate second messenger response in cells. Sci. Rep. 7, 7749 (2017). 61. Gupte, T . M., Malik, R. U., Sommese, R. F., Ritt, M. & Sivaramakrishnan, S. Priming GPCR signaling through the synergistic effect of two G proteins. Proc. Natl  Acad. Sci. USA 114, 37563761 (2017). 62. Flock, T . etal. Universal allosteric mechanism for   G activation by GPCRs. Nature 524, 173179  (2015). 63. Dror, R. O. etal. Structural basis for nucleotide exchange in heteromeric G proteins. Science 348,  13611365 (2015).   This study used atomic- level simulations to  elucidate the nucleotide release mechanism, which  is critical for G protein activation. 64. Wacker, D., Wang, C., Katritch, V. & Han, G. Structural features for functional selectivity at serotonin receptors.  Science 469, 175180 (2013). 65. Peng, Y. etal. 5-HT 2C receptor structures reveal the structural basis of GPCR polypharmacology. Cell 172,  719730 (2018). 66. Schnegge, A. M. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Evolutionary action and  structural basis of the allosteric switch controlling 2AR functional selectivity. Nat. Commun. 8, 2169  (2017). 67. Liu, J. J., Horst, R., Katritch, V., Stevens, R. C. &  Wthrich, K. Biased signaling pathways in 2-adrenergic receptor characterized by 19F- NMR.  Science 335, 11061110 (2012).   This study uses NMR techniques to observe  conformational differences induced in a GPCR by  biased ligands. 68. Ballesteros, J. A. & Weinstein, H. Integrated methods for the construction of three- dimensional models and  computational probing of structure- function relations in  G protein- coupled receptors. Methods Neurosciences   25, 366428 (1995). 69. Che, T . etal. Structure of the nanobody- stabilized  active state of the kappa opioid receptor. Cell 172,  5561 (2018). 70. Wacker, D. etal. Crystal structure of an LSD- bound  human serotonin receptor. Cell 168, 377389  (2017). 71. Wacker, D., Stevens, R. C. & Roth, B. L. How ligands illuminate GPCR molecular pharmacology. Cell 170,  414427 (2017). 72. McCorvy, J. D. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Structure- inspired design of  -arrestin-biased ligands for aminergic GPCRs.   Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 126134 (2017). 73. Shukla, A. K. etal. Visualisation of arrestin recruitment by a G- protein-coupled receptor. Nature   512, 218222 (2014). 74. Yang, F. etal. Phospho- selective mechanisms of  arrestin conformations and functions revealed by  unnatural amino acid incorporation and (19)F- NMR.  Nat. Commun. 6, 8202 (2015). 75. Staus, D. P . etal. Sortase ligation enables  homogeneous GPCR phosphorylation to reveal  diversity in  - arrestin coupling. Proc. Natl Acad.   Sci. USA 115, 38343839 (2018). 76. Zhou, X. E. etal. Identification of phosphorylation  codes for arrestin recruitment by G protein- coupled  receptors. Cell 170, 457459 (2017). 77. Thomsen, A. R. B. etal. GPCR- G protein- beta-arrestin  super- complex mediates sustained G protein  signaling. Cell 166, 907919 (2016). 78. Liang, Y. L. etal. Phase- plate cryo- EM structure of a  class B GPCR- G-protein complex. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Nature 546,   118123 (2017).   This study presents the first cryo- EM structure of a  GPCR and the first structure of a class B GPCR in an active state bound by a peptide agonist and a heterotrimeric G protein. 79. Zhang, Y. etal. Cryo- EM structure of the activated  GLP-1 receptor in complex with a G protein. Nature   546, 248253 (2017). 80. Wootten, D., Miller, L. J., Koole, C., Christopoulos, A. & Sexton, P . M. Allostery and biased agonism at class B  G protein- coupled receptors. Chem. Rev. 117,   111138 (2017). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': '81. Siu, F. Y. etal. Structure of the human glucagon   class B G- protein-coupled receptor. Nature 499,   444449 (2013). 82. Hollenstein, K. etal. Structure of class B GPCR  corticotropin- releasing factor receptor 1. Nature 499,  438443 (2013).   Together with reference 80, this study describes the first TMD structures of a class B GPCR and  reveals a unique binding mode for an allosteric  antagonist, which occurs deep in the  transmembrane bundle. 83. Jazayeri, A. etal. Extra- helical binding site of a  glucagon receptor antagonist. Nature 533, 274277  (2016). 84. Song, G. etal. Human GLP-1 receptor transmembrane domain structure in complex with allosteric modulators. Nature 546, 312315 (2017). 85. Koth, C. M. etal. Molecular basis for negative  regulation of the glucagon receptor. Proc. Natl Acad.  Sci. USA 109, 1439314398 (2012). 86. Mukund, S. etal. Inhibitory mechanism of an allosteric  antibody targeting the glucagon receptor. J. Biol.  Chem. 288, 3616836178 (2013). 87. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Zhang, H. etal. Structure of the full- length glucagon  class B G- protein-coupled receptor. Nature 546,   259264 (2017). 88. Zhang, H. etal. Structure of the glucagon receptor   in complex with a glucagon analogue. Nature 553,  106110 (2018). 89. Jazayeri, A. etal. Crystal structure of the GLP-1  receptor bound to a peptide agonist. Nature 546,  254258 (2017). 90. Wootten, D., Simms, J., Miller, L. J., Christopoulos, A.  & Sexton, P . M. Polar transmembrane interactions  drive formation of ligand- specific and signal pathway-   biased family B G protein- coupled receptor  conformations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110,   52115216 (2013). 91. Wootten, D. etal. The extracellular surface of the  GLP-1 receptor is a molecular trigger for biased  agonism. Cell 165, 16321643 (2016).   This study provides some of the first molecular and  mechanistic insights into the initiation and  activation of biased agonism for a GPCR. 92. Dal Maso, E. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Extracellular loops 2 and 3 of the calcitonin receptor selectively modify agonist binding  and efficacy. Biochem. Pharmacol. 150, 214244  (2018). 93. Wootten, D. etal. A hydrogen- bonded polar network  in the core of the glucagon- like peptide-1 receptor is a  fulcrum for biased agonism: lessons from class B  crystal structures. Mol. Pharmacol. 89, 335347  (2016). 94. Wootten, D. etal. Key interactions by conserved polar amino acids located at the transmembrane helical  boundaries in Class B GPCRs modulate activation,  effector specificity and biased signalling in the  glucagon- like peptide-1 receptor. Biochem.  Pharmacol. 118, 6887 (2016). 95. de Graaf, C. etal. Extending the structural view of  class B GPCRs. T rends Biochem. Sci. 42, 946960  (2017). 96. Harikumar, K. G. etal. Glucagon- like peptide-1  receptor dimerization differentially regulates agonist signaling but does not affect small molecule allostery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 1860718612  (2012). 97. Harikumar, K. G., Lau, S., Sexton, P . M., Wootten, D. & Miller, L. J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Coexpressed class B G proteincoupled secretin and GLP-1 receptors self- and cross- associate:  impact on pancreatic islets. Endocrinology 158,  16851700 (2017). 98. Schelshorn, D. etal. Lateral allosterism in the glucagon receptor family: glucagon- like peptide 1  induces G- protein-coupled receptor heteromer  formation. Mol. Pharmacol. 81, 309318 (2012). 99. Pediani, J. D., Ward, R. J., Marsango, S. & Milligan, G.  Spatial intensity distribution analysis: studies of G  protein- coupled receptor oligomerisation. T rends  Pharmacol. Sci. 39, 175186 (2018). 100. Mller, T . C., Moreno- Delgado, D., Pin, J.-P . &  Kniazeff, J. Class C G protein- coupled receptors:  reviving old couples with new partners. Biophys. Rep.   3, 5763 (2017). 101. Geng, Y. etal. Structural mechanism of ligand  activation in human calcium- sensing receptor. eLife 5,  e13662 (2016). 102. Geng, Y., Bush, M., Mosyak, L., Wang, F. & Fan, Q. R.  Structural mechanism of ligand activation in human GABAB receptor. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Nature 504, 254259 (2013). 103. Frangaj, A. & Fan, Q. R. Structural biology of GABA   B receptor. Neuropharmacology 136, 6879 (2017).104. Xue, L. etal. Major ligand- induced rearrangement of  the heptahelical domain interface in a GPCR dimer.  Nat. Chem. Biol. 11, 134140 (2015). 105. Leach, K. & Gregory, K. J. Molecular insights into allosteric modulation of Class C G protein- coupled  receptors. Pharmacol. Res. 116, 105118 (2017). 106. Cook, A. E. etal. Biased allosteric modulation at the CaS receptor engendered by structurally diverse  calcimimetics. Br. J. Pharmacol. 172, 185200  (2015). 107. Foster, D. J. & Conn, P . J. Allosteric modulation of GPCRs: new insights and potential utility for treatment  of schizophrenia and other CNS disorders. Neuron 94,  431446 (2017). 108. Dijkman, P . M. & Watts, A. Lipid modulation of early   G protein- coupled receptor signalling events. Biochim.  Biophys. Acta 1848, 28892897, (2015). 109. Desai, A. J., Dong, M., Langlais, B. T ., Dueck, A. C. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': '&  Miller, L. J. Cholecystokinin responsiveness varies  across the population dependent on metabolic  phenotype. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 106, 447456 (2017). 110. Desai, A. J., Dong, M. & Miller, L. J. Beneficial effects  of - sitosterol on type 1 cholecystokinin receptor  dysfunction induced by elevated membrane cholesterol. Clin. Nutr. 35, 13741379 (2016). 111. Zocher, M., Zhang, C., Rasmussen, S. G. F., Kobilka, B. K.  & Muller, D. J. Cholesterol increases kinetic, energetic,  and mechanical stability of the human  2-adrenergic  receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109,   E3463E3472 (2012). 112. Inagaki, S. etal. Modulation of the interaction between neurotensin receptor NTS1 and Gq protein  by lipid. J. Mol. Biol. 417, 95111 (2012). 113. Dawaliby, R. etal. Allosteric regulation of G proteincoupled receptor activity by phospholipids. Nat. Chem. Biol. 3, 3539 (2015). 114. Guinzberg, R. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Newly synthesized cAMP is  integrated at a membrane protein complex  signalosome to ensure receptor response specificity.  FEBS J. 284, 258276 (2017). 115. Stillwell, W. An Introduction to Biological Membranes:  Composition, Structure and Function (Elsevier Science,  2016). 116. Harayama, T . & Riezman, H. Understanding the  diversity of membrane lipid composition. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 281296 (2018). 117. Parton, R. G. & del Pozo, M. A. Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors, protectors and organizers.   Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14, 98112 (2013). 118. Rosholm, K. R. etal. Membrane curvature regulates ligand- specific membrane sorting of GPCRs in living  cells. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 724729 (2017).   This study highlights the importance of membrane curvature in regulation of GPCR function. 119. Shukla, A. K. G Protein- Coupled Receptors: Signaling,  T rafficking and Regulation Vol. 132 (Academic Press, 2016). 120. Wu, G. T rafficking of GPCRs Vol. 132 (Academic Press, 2015). 121. Bahouth, S. W. & Nooh, M. M. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Barcoding of GPCR trafficking and signaling through the various trafficking  roadmaps by compartmentalized signaling networks.  Cell. Signal. 36, 4255 (2017). 122. Wang, G., Wei, Z. & Wu, G. Role of Rab GTPases in the export trafficking of G protein- coupled receptors.  Small GTPases 26, 130135 (2017). 123. Irannejad, R., Tsvetanova, N. G., Lobingier, B. T . &   von Zastrow, M. Effects of endocytosis on receptor-   mediated signaling. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 35,   137143 (2015). 124. Farran, B. An update on the physiological and therapeutic relevance of GPCR oligomers. Pharmacol.  Res. 117, 303327 (2017). 125. Franco, R., Martnez- Pinilla, E., Lanciego, J. L. &  Navarro, G. Basic pharmacological and structural evidence for class A G- protein-coupled receptor  heteromerization.  Front. Pharmacol. 7, 76 (2016). 126. Gomes, I. etal. G proteincoupled receptor heteromers. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 56,   403425 (2016). 127. DeBruine, Z. J., Xu, H. E. & Melcher, K. Assembly and  architecture of the Wnt/ - catenin signalosome at the  membrane. Br. J. Pharmacol. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': '174, 45644574  (2017). 128. McLatchie, L. M. etal. RAMPs regulate the transport  and ligand specificity of the calcitonin- receptor-like  receptor. Nature 393, 333339 (1998). 129. Nikolaev, V. O. etal. Beta2-adrenergic receptor redistribution in heart failure changes cAMP  compartmentation. Science 327, 16531657 (2010). 130. Lyon, A. R. etal. Plasticity of surface structures and beta2-adrenergic receptor localization in failing ventricular cardiomyocytes during recovery from heart failure. Circ. Heart Fail. 5, 357365 (2012). 131. Jensen, D. D. etal. Endothelin- converting enzyme 1  and - arrestins exert spatiotemporal control of  substance P- induced inflammatory signals. J. Biol.  Chem. 289, 2028320294 (2014). 132. Ayling, L. J. etal. Adenylyl cyclase AC8 directly  controls its micro- environment by recruiting the actin  cytoskeleton in a cholesterol- rich milieu. J. Cell Sci.   125, 869886 (2012). 133. Halls, M. L. & Cooper, D. M. F. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Sub- picomolar relaxin  signalling by a pre- assembled RXFP1, AKAP79, AC2,  - arrestin 2, PDE4D3 complex. EMBO J. 29,   27722787 (2010).   This study identifies pre- assembled, ligand-   independent GPCR signalosomes that allow a GPCR to respond to extremely low concentrations of  circulating ligands. 134. Siljee, J. E. etal. Subcellular localization of MC4R   with ADCY3 at neuronal primary cilia underlies a common pathway for genetic predisposition to   obesity. Nat. Genet. 50, 180185 (2018). 135. Navarro, G. etal. Evidence for functional pre- coupled  complexes of receptor heteromers and adenylyl  cyclase. Nat. Commun. 9, 1242 (2018). 136. Wehbi, V. L. etal. Noncanonical GPCR signaling arising  from a PTH receptorarrestinG  complex. Proc.  Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 15301535 (2013).   This study is one of the first to report a GPCR that promotes persistent G protein signalling from intracellular endosomal compartments, which is  mediated by - arrestins. 137. Suofu, Y. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Dual role of mitochondria in producing  melatonin and driving GPCR signaling to block  cytochrome c release. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,  E7997E8006 (2017). 138. T adevosyan, A. etal. Intracellular angiotensin- II interacts  with nuclear angiotensin receptors in cardiac fibroblasts  and regulates RNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and  collagen secretion. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 6, e004965  (2017). 139. Vaniotis, G. etal. Regulation of cardiac nitric   oxide signaling by nuclear  - adrenergic and  endothelin receptors. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 62,  5868 (2013). 140. T svetanova, N. G., Irannejad, R. & von Zastrow, M. G.  Protein- coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling via  heterotrimeric G proteins from endosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 66896696 (2015). 141. T svetanova, N. G. & von Zastrow, M. Spatial encoding  of cyclic AMP signaling specificity by GPCR endocytosis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 10611065 (2014). 142. Vilardaga, J.-P ., Jean- Alphonse, F. G. & Gardella, T . J.  Endosomal generation of cAMP in GPCR signaling. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 700706 (2014). 143. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Jensen, D. D. etal. Neurokinin 1 receptor signaling in  endosomes mediates sustained nociception and is a viable therapeutic target for prolonged pain relief.   Sci. T ransl Med. 9, eaal3447 (2017).   This study reveals a critical role for endosomal signalling of a GPCR in pain perception and  demonstrates the potential therapeutic use of  endosomally targeted GPCR antagonists. 144. Yarwood, R. E. etal. Endosomal signaling of the  receptor for calcitonin gene- related peptide mediates  pain transmission. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114,  1230912314 (2017). 145. Jean- Alphonse, F. G. etal.  2-adrenergic receptor  control of endosomal PTH receptor signaling via G .  Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 259261 (2017). 146. Wright, P . T . etal. Caveolin-3 regulates compartmentation  of cardiomyocyte beta2-adrenergic receptor- mediated  cAMP signaling. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 67, 3848  (2014). 147. Beautrait, A. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 15, 'content': 'A new inhibitor of the  - arrestin/ AP2 endocytic complex reveals interplay between GPCR internalization and signalling. Nat. Commun. 8,  15054 (2017). 148. Sykes, D. A. etal. Extrapyramidal side effects of  antipsychotics are linked to their association kinetics  at dopamine D2 receptors. Nat. Commun. 8, 763  (2017). 149. Wacker, D. etal. Crystal structure of an LSD- bound  human serotonin receptor. Cell 168, 377389  (2017). 150. Lane, J. R., May, L. T ., Parton, R. G., Sexton, P. M. &  Christopoulos, A. A kinetic view of GPCR allostery and  biased agonism. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 929937  (2017). 151. Benredjem, B., Dallaire, P . & Pineyro, G. Analyzing  biased responses of GPCR ligands. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 32, 7176 (2017). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': '152. Bradley, S. J., T obin, A. B. & Prihandoko, R. The use of  chemogenetic approaches to study the physiological  roles of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in the  central nervous system. Neuropharmacology 136,  421426 (2018). 153. Roth, B. L. DREADDs for neuroscientists. Neuron 89,  683694 (2016). 154. Bruchas, M. R. & Roth, B. L. New technologies for elucidating opioid receptor function. Trends  Pharmacol. Sci. 37, 279289 (2016). 155. Spangler, S. M. & Bruchas, M. R. Optogenetic  approaches for dissecting neuromodulation and GPCR  signaling in neural circuits. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 32,  5670 (2017). 156. Boerrigter, G., Soergel, D. G., Violin, J. D., Lark, M. W.  & Burnett, J. C. TRV120027, a novel beta- arrestin  biased ligand at the angiotensin II type I receptor,  unloads the heart and maintains renal function when  added to furosemide in experimental heart failure.  Circ. Heart Fail. 5, 627634 (2012). 157. T arigopula, M. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Cardiac myosin light chain  phosphorylation and inotropic effects of a biased  ligand, TRV120023, in a dilated cardiomyopathy  model. Cardiovasc. Res. 107, 226234 (2015). 158. Brust, T . F. etal. Biased agonists of the kappa opioid receptor suppress pain and itch without causing sedation or dysphoria. Sci. Signal. 9, ra117 (2016). 159. DeWire, S. M. etal. A G protein- biased ligand at the  mu- opioid receptor is potently analgesic with reduced  gastrointestinal and respiratory dysfunction compared  with morphine. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 344,   708717 (2013). 160. Manglik, A. etal. Structure- based discovery of opioid  analgesics with reduced side effects. Nature 537,  185190 (2016). 161. Schmid, C. L. etal. Bias factor and therapeutic window  correlate to predict safer opioid analgesics. Cell 171,  11651175 (2017).   This is an important study that examines the  correlation between measures of biased agonism  and invivo therapeutic index (the ratio of beneficial to detrimental effects). 162. Desai, A. J. & Miller, L. J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Changes in the plasma membrane in metabolic disease: impact of the membrane environment on G protein- coupled  receptor structure and function. Br. J. Pharmacol.  https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13943 (2018). 163. Vijayakumar, N. etal. White matter integrity in  individuals at ultra- high risk for psychosis: a  systematic review and discussion of the role of  polyunsaturated fatty acids. BMC Psychiatry 16,   287 (2016). 164. Cheong, H. I. etal. Hypoxia sensing through  -adrenergic  receptors. JCI Insight 1, e90240 (2016). 165. Shellhammer, J. P . etal. Amino acid metabolites that  regulate G protein signaling during osmotic stress.  PLoS Genet. 13, e1006829 (2017). 166. Ardura, J. A., Alonso, V., Esbrit, P . & Friedman, P . A. Oxidation inhibits PTH receptor signaling and trafficking. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 482,  10191024 (2017).167. Ghanouni, P . etal. The effect of pH on beta(2) adrenoceptor function. Evidence for protonation-   dependent activation. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 31213127  (2000). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': '168. Vickery, O. N., Machtens, J. P . & Zachariae, U. Membrane potentials regulating GPCRs: insights from experiments and molecular dynamics simulations.  Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 30, 4450 (2016). 169. Isom, D. G. & Dohlman, H. G. Buried ionizable networks are an ancient hallmark of G protein- coupled  receptor activation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,  57025707 (2015). 170. Katritch, V. etal. Allosteric sodium in class A GPCR  signaling. T rends Pharmacol. Sci. 39, 233244  (2014). 171. Massink, A. etal. Sodium ion binding pocket mutations and adenosine A2A receptor function. Mol.  Pharmacol. 82, 305313 (2015). 172. Thompson, M. D. etal. Pharmacogenetics of the G protein- coupled receptors. Methods Mol. Biol. 1175,  189242 (2014). 173. Perez, J. M. etal.  1-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms  confer differential function and predisposition to heart  failure. Nat. Med. 9, 13001305 (2003). 174. Liggett, S. B. etal. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'A polymorphism within a conserved beta(1)-adrenergic receptor motif alters cardiac function and beta- blocker response in human heart  failure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 1128811293  (2006). 175. Freitas, C. etal. Lymphoid differentiation of  hematopoietic stem cells requires efficient Cxcr4  desensitization. J. Exp. Med. 214, 20232040  (2017). 176. Barak, L. S., Oakley, R. H., Laporte, S. A. & Caron, M. G.  Constitutive arrestin- mediated desensitization of a  human vasopressin receptor mutant associated with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.  USA 98, 9398 (2001). 177. Michel, M. C. & Charlton, S. J. Biased agonism in drug discovery  is it too soon to choose a path?  Mol. Pharmacol. 93, 259265 (2018). 178. Black, J. & Leff, P . Operational models of  pharmacological agonism. Proc. R. Soc. 220,   141162 (1983). 179. Hager, M. V., Clydesdale, L., Gellman, S. H., Sexton, P . M.   & Wootten, D. Characterization of signal bias at   the GLP-1 receptor induced by backbone modification  of GLP-1. Biochem. Pharmacol. 136, 99108   (2017). 180. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Thompson, G. L. etal. Systematic analysis of factors influencing observations of biased agonism at the mu-opioid receptor. Biochem. Pharmacol. 113, 7087  (2016). 181. Karamitri, A. etal. Melatonin MT2 receptor variants associated with type 2 diabetes affect specific subsets  of the receptor signaling modalities. Sci. Signal.   (in the press) (2018). 182. Qin, C. X. etal. Small- molecule-biased formyl peptide  receptor agonist compound 17b protects against  myocardial ischaemia- reperfusion injury in mice. Nat.  Commun. 8, 14232 (2017).183. vander Westhuizen, E. T ., Breton, B., Christopoulos, A.  & Bouvier, M. Quantification of ligand bias for  clinically relevant  2-adrenergic receptor ligands:  implications for drug taxonomy. Mol. Pharmacol. 85,  492509 (2014). 184. Valant, C., Robert Lane, J., Sexton, P . M. &  Christopoulos, A. The best of both worlds? Bitopic  orthosteric/allosteric ligands of G proteincoupled  receptors. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. T oxicol. 52,   153178 (2012). 185. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Thal, D., Glukhova, A., Sexton, P . M. & Christopoulos, A.  Structural insights into G- protein-coupled receptor  allostery. Nature 559, 4553 (2018). 186. Christopoulos, A. etal. International Union of Basic and  Clinical Pharmacology. XC. Multisite pharmacology:  Recommendations for the nomenclature of receptor allosterism and allosteric ligands. Pharmacol. Rev. 66,  918947 (2014). Acknowledgements P .M.S., A.C. and D.W. are Principal, Senior Principal and Career Development Fellows of the National Health and  Medical Research Council of Australia, respectively. M.M.B.  and M.M.-S. acknowledge the UK Medical Research Council  (MC_U105185859) for support. M.M.-S. is supported by a  Federation of European Biochemical Societies Long-   TermFellowship, and M.M.B. is a Lister Institute Fellow   and is also supported by the European Research Council (ERC- COG-2015-682414). Author contributions D.W., A.C., M.M.-S., M.M.B. and P .M.S. researched data for the article. D.W., A.C., M.M.B. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'and P .M.S. substantially con - tributed to discussion of content. D.W., M.M.B., M.M.-S. and  P .M.S. wrote the article. D.W., A.C., M.M.-S., M.M.B.   and P.M.S. reviewed and edited the manuscript before  submission. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Publishers note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Reviewer information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology  thanks T . Hebert,   V. Katritch, S. Rajagopal and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Mechanisms of signalling and biased agonism in G protein-coupled receptors', 'page': 16, 'content': 'ReLa Ted LinkS Common G  subunit Numbering (CGN): https://www.mrc-  lmb.cam.ac.uk/CGN/ GPCR Drug Browser: http://gpcrdb.org/drugs/drugbrowser GPCR Database: www.gpcrdb.org Natural variation of GPCRs in the human population:    http://www.gpcrdb.org/mutational_landscape/statistics Protein Contacts Atlas: https://www.mrc- lmb.cam.ac.uk/pca selectivity determinants of GPCRG protein signalling:   http://www.gpcrdb.org/signprot/statistics NATuRE REvIEWS | MOLeCULAR CeLL BiOLOGyReviews   vOlumE 19 | OCTOBER 2018 | 653', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Article Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets Graphical Abstract Highlights dGPCRs targeted by FDA-approved drugs show genetic variation in the human population dGenetic variation occurs in functional sites and may result inaltered drug response dWe present an online resource of GPCR genetic variants forpharmacogenomics research dUnderstanding variation in drug targets may help alleviateeconomic healthcare burdenAuthors Alexander S. Hauser, Sreenivas Chavali,Ikuo Masuho, Leonie J. Jahn,Kirill A. Martemyanov, David E. Gloriam,M. Madan Babu Correspondence alexander.hauser@sund.ku.dk (A.S.H.), madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk (M.M.B.) In Brief A pharmacogenomic analysis probes the effects of genetic variation in G-protein-coupled receptors on responses to FDA-approved drugs and estimates how thisgenetic variation may impacthealthcare costs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 1, 'content': 'variant responsewild type response genetic variation drug and  GPCR targetsfunctional effects sales informationGPCR Pharmacogenomics  dose responseincreased responsedesired therapeutic effect reduced responsenormal response dose response structural data Hauser et al., 2018, Cell 172, 4154 January 11, 2018 2017 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Article Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets Alexander S. Hauser,1,2,*Sreenivas Chavali,1Ikuo Masuho,3Leonie J. Jahn,4Kirill A. Martemyanov,3David E. Gloriam,2 and M. Madan Babu1,5,* 1MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK 2Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 2, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark 3Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute Florida, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA 4The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University Denmark, Kemitorvet 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 5Lead Contact *Correspondence: alexander.hauser@sund.ku.dk (A.S.H.), madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk (M.M.B.) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.033 SUMMARY Natural genetic variation in the human genome is a cause of individual differences in responses to med-ications and is an underappreciated burden on public health. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Although 108 G-protein-coupled re- ceptors (GPCRs) are the targets of 475 ( /C2434%) Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approveddrugs and account for a global sales volume ofover 180 billion US dollars annually, the prevalenceof genetic variation among GPCRs targeted bydrugs is unknown. By analyzing data from 68,496individuals, we nd that GPCRs targeted by drugs show genetic variation within functional regions such as drug- and effector-binding sites in thehuman population. We experimentally show thatcertain variants of m-opioid and Cholecystokinin-A receptors could lead to altered or adverse drugresponse. By analyzing UK National Health Servicedrug prescription and sales data, we suggest thatcharacterizing GPCR variants could increase pre- scription precision, improving patients quality of life, and relieve the economic and societal burdendue to variable drug responsiveness. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'INTRODUCTION A system of rigorous clinical trials and regulation exist to ensure that a new drug is safe and effective when reaching the market.However, natural human genetic variation(s) may cause individ- uals to respond differently to the same medication. For instance, genetic variation is linked to differences in response to anti-hy-pertensive drugs such as b-blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers, and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (Johnson, 2008; Liggett et al., 2006; Mialet Perez et al., 2003 ). Natural variation may also increase the propensity for adversereaction to drugs ( Roden and George, 2002 ). Thus, genetic vari- ation in drug targets may alter therapeutic efcacy and safety of drugs. Inadequate accounting for adverse drug reactions cost ascal burden of /C2430 billion US dollars annually in the US alone (Sultana et al., 2013 ). Hence, understanding genetic variation indrug targets has direct bearing on tailoring drug prescriptions (i.e., personalized healthcare) to maximize efcacy and safety while reducing side effects. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Many druggable targets for treatment of common diseases involve G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that mediate ther- apeutic effects of /C2434% of the marketed drugs ( Santos et al., 2017; Rask-Andersen et al., 2014; Hauser et al., 2017 ). The sales of GPCR targeting drugs represent a global market share of over 27% ( The IDG Knowledge Management Center, 2016 ). Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs target at least 108GPCRs (herein referred as GPCR drug targets), with an additional 66 receptors targeted by agents that are/were in clinical trials ( Ta- ble S1 ). Some drugs act through several targets and frequently include GPCRs. Thus, GPCRs serve as primary and secondarytargets and determine the pharmacological proles of the re- sponses ( Allen and Roth, 2011; Hauser et al., 2017 ). Although studies have identied polymorphisms in GPCRs that lead to var-iable or adverse drug response ( Table S2 ), the prevalence and impact of genetic variation among all human GPCRs that are tar- geted by FDA-approved drugs remain unknown. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'In this study, wepresent a comprehensive analysis and map of the pharmacoge- nomics landscape of GPCR drug targets ( Figure 1 ). Prevalence and Incidence of Natural Variation in GPCR Drug TargetsWhat is the prevalence of GPCR drug targets to harbor amissense variation (MV) within an individual? An investigation of complete genotype information for 2,504 healthy individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project ( Auton et al., 2015 ) showed that, on average, an individual harbors 68 missense variations within the coding region of one-third of the GPCR drug targets ( Fig- ure 2 A). Of these, an average of 8 variants per individual have previously known clinical associations with altered drug response ( Figure 2 B). For instance, the heterozygous A307T vari- ation (minor allele frequency [MAF]: 0.49) in the follicle stimu-lating hormone receptor (FSHR) is prevalent in women whodevelop polycystic ovary syndrome and is associated with a higher responsiveness to exogenous FSH ( Doln et al., 2011 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The G9S variant (MAF: 0.48) in the dopamine receptor 3(DRD3) is linked to increased risk of gastrointestinal toxicity upon Levodopa treatment in subjects with Parkinsons disease (Rieck et al., 2016 )(Figure 2 C). Analysis of 1,762 trios (father, mother, offspring) ( Turner et al., 2017 ) revealed that 6 offsprings harbor at least one new de novo MV in a GPCR drug target. In Cell172, 4154, January 11, 2018 2017 MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology. Published by Elsevier Inc. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 3, 'content': 'other words, a new, non-lethal, missense, germline mutation in a GPCR drug target arises in 1 of every /C24300 newborns ( Figure 2 D). These observations collectively suggest that GPCR drug targetsare likely to show substantial variation with new missense muta-tions continuing to arise within their coding region. Mutational Landscape of GPCR Drug Targets In addition to MV, mutations that introduce a stop codon, cause a frameshift or affect essential splice sites constitute loss-of- function variations (LoF). The abundance of a protein-codinggene may be affected by deletions and/or duplications (copy number variation [CNV]). Such mutational events may alter the functional property and/or change the abundance of a drugtarget, either of which can inuence drug efcacy, safety prole, and adverse reaction. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 3, 'content': 'How much variability is seen in the GPCR drug targets in the human population? To characterize the spec-trum and prevalence of variation in GPCR drug targets, we inves-tigated data from the exome aggregation consortium (ExAC), which contains aggregated information on MVs, LoFs, and CNVs for /C2460,000 healthy individuals ( Lek et al., 2016; Ruderfer et al., 2016 ). This allowed us to characterize the mutational land- scape of currently druggable GPCRs in the human population. We nd a total of 14,192 MVs in 108 GPCR drug targets, with a mean of 128 rare (MAF <1 310 /C03) and 3.7 common (MAFR1310/C03) variants per receptor ( Figure 3 A and S1A).On average, 25% of all positions in each of the 108 GPCRs contain a MV ( Figure 3 A). GPCR drug targets have, on average, a LoF mutation in 9.3 different positions per receptor ( Figure 3 B). Our conservative estimate suggests that on average, at least 120of the 60,706 individuals harbor such LoF mutations (i.e., stop codon, essential splice site, and frameshift mutation) in a GPCR drug target (0.2%; STAR Methods ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 3, 'content': 'In fact, a minimum of one LoF variant has been observed in each of the 108 GPCRs suggesting that heterozygosity, regulatory epistasis, and buff- ering mechanisms such as allele-specic expression mightoffset the effects of these drastic mutations in healthy individuals (Lappalainen et al., 2011; Kukurba et al., 2014 ). Many GPCR drug targets are also susceptible to CNVs and each of the GPCRsanalyzed had on average two duplications and three deletions reported in the ExAC dataset ( Figure 3 C). Them-opioid receptor (MOR; OPRM1), targeted by analgesics, is one of the highly variable GPCR drug targets in the humanpopulation ( Table S3 ;Figure S1 B). Integrating the information about the extent of variability of GPCR targets with the FDA- approved drugs revealed that several of the highly polymorphicGPCRs are targeted by a large number of drugs ( Figures S2AS2C). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Thus, the extensive genetic variation in GPCR drug targets may contribute to a substantial, and as yet underappre-ciated, variability in drug responses between individuals in the population.prescription and sales data 475 10866 224approved  GPCR drug targetstrial GPCR     targets  non-   targeted GPCRs      clinical annotations drug-variant pair in vitro   mutations Assessing the spectrum, prevalence and functional impact  of genetic variation for alteration in drug responsefunctional sites variant-disease associationsGPCR Pharmacogenomics genetic variation from ExAC (60,706 individuals)genotypes from 1000 Genomes Project (2,504 individuals) missense variation loss of function variationde novo  mutations (5,286 individuals)ligand binding G protein / Arrestin modification sitesodium pocketmicroswitches 11/2011 - 05/2017 21% 79%2016  sales volume non- GPCR targetsGPCR targets GPCR copy number variation + / 196 receptorligand  complexesvariant datafunctional effects sales data drug and GPCR targetsmono-alleleic expressionx drugs (6.6 bn)(1.7 bn) Figure 1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Pharmacogenomic Landscape of GPCR Drug Targets Schematic highlighting the different types of data analyzed in this study, ranging from data on drug targets, variants, functional effects, sequenc es, structures to information on prescription, and sales of drugs in the UK. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Putative Functional Impact of Variants in GPCR Drug Targets Can the observed variants of a receptor affect drug response and what fraction of the variants is likely to have an impact?We analyzed each of the MVs and investigated whether they map to functionally relevant regions (i.e., ligand binding, effector binding, allosteric sodium binding pocket, activation micro-switches, and post-translational modication sites) to infer possible impact ( Figure 4 A;Table S4 ). We identied functional sites based on data from all 196 available GPCR-ligand crystalstructures; published literature and 2,544 experimentally vali-dated post-translational modication sites (PTMs). 2,036 muta- tions in the different receptors fall within known functional sites (14.3% of 14,192 MVs; Zscore = 3.7; p = 1.5 310 /C04; permuta- tion test; Figure 4 A;Table S4 ). Examination of structures of GPCRs bound to FDA-approved drugs revealed missense variation in the drug-binding pocket ofseveral receptors ( Figure S3 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'For instance, 8 of the 9 positions in the drug-binding pocket of maraviroc (antiretroviral drug) in the CCR5 receptor exhibit polymorphism suggesting that patientscarrying such variant CCR5 receptors may show altered response when treated for HIV infection. One in every 10 MV resides in the G-protein- or b-arrestin-binding interface ( Table S4). For instance, of the 108 GPCR drug targets, we nd that for 67 receptors, there is at least one allele with a mutation in the highly conserved 3.50 350 position (GPCRdb numbering) and for 41 receptors in the position 8.49 349. These positions make extensive non-covalent contacts with G-protein and arrestin, respectively ( Kang et al., 2015; Liang et al., 2017; Ras- mussen et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2017 ) and hence are important for intracellular signaling and drug response. This suggests that individuals with such receptor variants may exhibit differences inMinor Allele Frequency (1,000 Genomes Project):A D 1,762 trios (5,286 individuals)no. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'of MVs in GPCR drug  targets per individual (n=2,504) no. of clinical MVs in GPCR drug  targets per individual (n=2,504)B C 6 distinct GPCR drug targets  9 de novo  missense mutations  (DRD1, ACM4, PE2R3, ADA2C, MTR1B, EDNRB)no. of GPCR drug targets with an MV per individual (n=2,504) no. of GPCR drug targets with  clinical MVs per individual (n=2,504) 652/1161 78/735705/1026642/1172 582/1218 179/761 130/763 135/662406/1228 243/1008 87/716197/640 number of  homozygous/heterozygous individuals 59/295 17/34072/461 36/504Figure 2. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Distribution of Individuals Harboring Missense Variation in GPCR Drug Targets (A and B) Estimates based on genotype data from 2,504 individual genomes was made per individualon (A) number of missense variants in GPCR drugtargets (left) and the number of GPCR drug targetsharboring a missense variation (right) and (B)number of clinically known variants that alter ef-cacy of drug response or toxicity in GPCR drugtargets (left) and the number of affected GPCR drugtargets with clinically known mutations (right).(C) Allele frequencies of variants, known to alterdrug response in 2,504 individuals (number ofhomozygous/heterozygous carriers) ( Table S2 ). (D) Analysis of 1,762 studied trios (father-mother-offspring) revealed a total of 9 de novo missense mutations in 6 GPCR drug targets. G-protein selectivity or biased signaling and thus respond differently to the same drug due to differences in GPCR signaling. Missense variants were also observed in other functional sites that inuence GPCR structure, dynamics, activation, allostery, and function. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'These include mutations inthe allosteric sodium-binding pocket that modulate receptor activity ( Katritch et al., 2014 ), micro-switches that are critical for receptor conformational changes ( Trzaskow- ski et al., 2012; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016; Wacker et al.,2013 ), as well as post-translational modication sites such as N-glycosylation in the N-terminal tail and phosphorylation in the C-terminal tail that can inuence receptor expression andsignaling, respectively ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2014 )(Table S4 ; Figure S4 A). Individuals carrying such variant receptors may respond differently to drugs because of altered basal activityand signaling due to perturbation of residues important for conformational changes. They may also show differences because of altered expression, localization, trafcking, or desen-sitization due to disruption of residues important for key post-translational modications (e.g., phosphorylation sites). Analysis of the putative functional impact of these variants by SIFT and PolyPhen revealed that 9,522 of the 14,192 MVs havethe potential to cause a functional impact due to changes in the physicochemical properties of the variant ( Figure 4 B; herein referred to putative functional sites). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Of these, 1,772 MVs map tothe 2,036 known functional sites described above (i.e., /C2487% of the known functional site variations have been captured by SIFT or PolyPhen; permutation test; Zscore = 24.5; p < 1 310 /C05). MVs with putative functional impact map more often within the trans-membrane region and loops compared to variants of unknown functional impact (Wilcoxon rank-sum test for normalized segment lengths; TM segments: p < 2.2 310 /C016; extracellular (EC) loops: p < 2.8 310/C07; intracellular (IC) loops: p < 2.3 310/C03;Figures S4 BS4D). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 5, 'content': 'and Bo ckmann, 2016; Katritch et al., 2014; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013, 2016; Wacker et al., 2017 ). Pharmacological and Clinical Effects of Receptor Variants Are the individuals with variant receptors likely to respond differ- ently to drugs? To investigate this, we compiled experimentaldata on ligand-mutant GPCR interactions. Consistent with the ndings above, of the 49 experimentally tested mutations corre- sponding to naturally occurring variants in 24 receptors, 32%(16 of 49) show at least a 5-fold change in afnity or potency to one of the ligands tested. Of these, 68% (11 of 16) fall withinknown or putative functional sites ( Table S4 ). These observations suggest that naturally occurring variations in these drug targets can affect drug binding. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 5, 'content': 'We then analyzed data on drug-missense variant associations from population-based clinical studies and compiled a dataset of statistical association between mutations in 16 different posi- tions among 11 receptors and altered response to one of 39approved drugs ( Figure 4 B;Table S2 ). These drugs cover treat- ment of diverse disorders ranging from metabolic, respiratory, nervous, and reproductive system disorders to cardiovasculardiseases. We categorized the diseases for which a drug is administered and linked this information with the variant, andABC Figure 3. Genetic Variation Landscape of GPCR Drug Targets (AC) Scatterplots of (A) missense variation (red), (B) loss-of-function mutations (blue), and (C) copy-number variation (purple) for GPCR drug ta rgets. Each mutation type shows the number of observed variants (separated into deletions and duplications for CNVs) for a given GPCR drug target. Missense varia tion density was obtained by normalizing number of missense mutations to the receptor sequence length. Loss-of-function mutations are presented as the m inimum percentage of individuals harboring at least one copy of a protein-truncating variant ( STAR Methods ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Correlations and mean values ( m) are shown for MVs and LoFs. Mean values ( m) for the distributions are provided. Genetic variation landscapes of GPCR drug targets that are in clinical trials are provided in Table S3 and S4). Lower half of the gure shows the distribution of top 10 (upper panels) and bottom 10 ranking GPCR drug targets (lower panels). See also Figures S1 ,S2, and S3. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 6, 'content': 'A B (legend on next page) Cell172, 4154, January 11, 2018 45', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'the position on the receptor. Of the 16 variants that have been associated with an altered drug response, four variants reside within putative functional sites and have modest to high allele frequencies (MAF = 0.18  0.49; Figure 4 B). The rest of the MVs reside outside of functional sites, suggesting that such mutations may be affecting yet-to-be characterized functional sites. Such sites may facilitate interactions with other factorssuch as chaperones, membrane proteins, cytosolic proteins,and membrane lipids, form a part of oligomerization interface or linear motifs within disordered regions, or may inuence receptor biogenesis and expression homeostasis ( Chen et al., 2014; van der Lee et al., 2014; Venkatakrishnan et al., 2014; Bou- crot et al., 2015; Gupta et al., 2017 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Natural Receptor Variants Can Impact Drug Response and Bias Signaling In order to better understand the implications of the observedvariations, we experimentally investigated the impact of varia- tions in two GPCR drug targets. We rst analyzed the m-opioid receptor, a highly variable GPCR drug target with one of the high-est numbers of FDA-approved drugs ( Figure S2 ). Previously uncharacterized polymorphisms around the ligand-binding site were selected and tested using a real-time bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) assay, which monitors statetransitions in G-protein subunits upon receptor stimulation. Quantifying the onset kinetics of G-protein activation by GPCRs (K ON) in this assay approximates potency, while the maximal response amplitude (R Max) reects the efcacy ( Masuho et al., 2015a )(Figures 5 A, 5B, S5A, and S5B). Our assay could reliably discriminate differential effects of full agonist (morphine) fromthat of partial agonist (buprenorphine) and antagonist (naloxone),compared to the endogenous agonist endomorphine-1 for the wild-type receptor ( Figure 5 C). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Three of the variants exhibited a range of functional alterations inm-opioid receptor signaling ( Figures 5 D and 5E). One variant (M153V 3x36) resulted in partial loss of function, reducing its responses to both full agonists and the partial agonist. The twoother variants uniquely altered m-opioid receptor pharmacology by biasing drug action in a drug selective fashion. Specically, the K235N 3x40variant behaved like the wild-type receptor in response to the endogenous ligand. However, K235N3x40dis- played increased efcacy and potency to buprenorphine relative to the wild-type. K ONestimates show that the potency of responses to full agonist morphine also increased, but that of en-domorphine-1 decreased with no change in their efcacies (R Max). Such behavior is expected to produce little difference in baseline phenotypes in individuals carrying this mutation butwould be expected to augment responsiveness to treatmentwith synthetic opioids, increasing the risk of an inadvertent overdose. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Another variant V302I 6x55exhibited gain-of-function effects with increased potencies to full agonists and efcacy of the partial agonist. Importantly, both gain-of-function variantsmaintained G-protein signaling when treated with an antagonist naloxone, an activity not seen with wild-type human m-opioid re- ceptor but previously reported for the mouse receptor ( Masuho et al., 2015a ). These ndings suggest that individuals with this variant receptor may manifest loss of efcacy when treated with naloxone, which is typically administered as a detoxifying agent in patients with opioid overdose. Further adverse reactionsmight arise in response to combinatorial medications, e.g., bu- prenorphine/naloxone if prescribed for management of opioid abuse ( Boyer, 2012; Orman and Keating, 2009 ). Thus, receptor variants can have specic effects on the response to some drugs that may not be evident from their response to natural ligand. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'We also examined changes in G-protein-binding specicity by investigating the effect of polymorphisms at the G-protein-bind-ing interface in the cholecystokinin A receptor (CCKAR). This re- ceptor couples to several G proteins to manifest its physiological effects ( Dufresne et al., 2006 )(Figures 5 F, 5G, S5C, and S5D). Wild-type CCKAR robustly coupled to all four G asubfamilies (R MaxinFigure 5 H; for order of preference, see k ONinFigure 5 H). Notably, two polymorphisms in the G-protein-coupling interface(R139I 3x50and R150W34x54) differentially altered coupling prefer- ence ( Figures 5 I, 5J, S5C, and S5D). The R150W34x54variant showed increased signaling efcacy via G ao and G aq, but diminished signaling efcacy via G a13 with no alteration in G as coupling. In contrast, this variant exhibited diminished potency of Gao, Gaq, and G a13 but not G as activation. On the other hand, the R139I3x50variant showed equally diminished efcacy across all four G proteins, yet potency was diminished only for Gao, Gaq, and G a13 but not for G as. Thus, polymorphisms at the G-protein-coupling site can change the balance of G-pro-tein-coupling proles to the same drug. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'For these experiments, we used caerulein, a previously FDA-approved drug (agonist, which closely mimics the endogenous peptide agonist), thatwas retracted from the market. Nevertheless, it highlights that the susceptibility to adverse reactions to drugs can differ de- pending on the variant, and that this should be considered inthe drug development process (especially, agonists) againstreceptors that can couple to multiple G-protein families. The effect of a polymorphism on drug response is more com- plex than what can be measured in overexpression, cell-basedstudies, as one needs to consider the entire human physiology. Although drugs (especially agonists) require only certain abun- dance of the receptor to bring about their maximal response,the expression of a variant allele can (1) result in gain-of-function Figure 4. Missense Variations in GPCR Drug Targets and Their Possible Functional Impact (A) Variants predicted to have impact by SIFT or PolyPhen (dark green). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 7, 'content': 'MVs can affect different functional sites (light green), which were dened as l igand binding (left), post-translational-modication site (bottom), and micro-switches including allosteric sodium ion binding pocket and G-protein/arrest in interaction interface (right). The displayed structures show missense variants within 5 A (red) of an approved drug (left and right) or MVs within 5 A distance to the G protein or arrestin. PDB IDs are provided in the bottom of each structure sub-panel.(B) Disease ontology (left), FDA-approved drug (middle), and variant (right) known (i.e., statistical association in clinical-genetics studies) to alter drug response or efcacy or lead to adverse drug response ( Table S2 ). In some cases, the drug and disease are linked to reect the clinical study design and are not drugs given to treat those diseases.See also Figure S4 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 8, 'content': 'effects to certain drugs, or (2) alter effector selectivity that will be relevant even in a heterozygous condition with a wild-type allele.In this context, analysis of allele-specic expression data in humans revealed that a signicant fraction of the GPCR drug targets are expressed in a mono allelic manner ( Figure S5 E; p<1310 /C05). This suggests that the overall abundance of the wild-type (WT) and variant receptor may vary in different hetero- zygous individuals harboring the same receptor variant. Thus,the presence of a wild-type allele may not always buffer the effects of a variant allele.Taken together, these observations provide a map of poten- tial pharmacological implications of natural variation in humanGPCRs. To facilitate studies on yet-to-be characterized variants, we provide a comprehensive receptor tool and visu- alization in a new section of the GPCR database ( Figure S6 ; http://www.gpcrdb.org/ , Genetic Variation tab). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 8, 'content': 'This online, interactive platform allows pha rmacologists, molecular mod- elers, clinicians, and anyone interested to select and studythe impact of natural variation for any drug target (including those that are/were in clinical trials). This resource Figure 5. Effects of Natural Mutations on Drug Activity and G-Protein Coupling (A) Positions of selected missense variations of the m-opioid receptor (MOR) near the ligand-binding pocket. (B) Schema of the BRET assay for real-time monitoring of G-protein activation. Activating m-opioid receptors by agonist leads to the dissociation of inactive heterotrimeric G proteins into active GTP-bound G aand Venus-G bgsubunits. The free Venus-G bgthen interacts with the G bgeffector mimetic masGRK3ct-Nluc to increase the BRET signal.(C) Ligand/drug-induced maximum BRET amplitude ( R Max) and activation rate constants ( kON) by wild-type m-opioid receptor (mean SEM, n = 6 wells). (D) Real-time monitoring of ligand/drug actions on m-opioid receptor mutants (mean response trace, n = 3 or 6). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 8, 'content': '(E) Quantication of stimulus bias ( RMAX, left and kON, right) of m-opioid receptor mutants. The values of agonist-induced responses were normalized to the reference, wild-type m-opioid receptor (black line). The values of naloxone-induced responses were normalized to the K235N3.36x36mutant (thickness represents the SEM over n = 3). (F) Positions of selected missense variations of the Cholecystokinin receptor type A.(G) Schema of the BRET assay for real-time monitoring of G-protein activity for CCKAR experiments.(H) Agonist-induced maximum BRET amplitude ( R Max) and activation rate constants ( kON) by wild-type CCKAR (mean SEM, n = 6 wells). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 8, 'content': '(I) Real-time monitoring of G-protein activation by CCKAR mutants stimulated with caerulein (30 mM, applied at 5 s, n = 3) normalized to the maximum amplitude of the wild-type receptor.(J) Quantication of G-protein-coupling bias ( R MAX, left and kON, right) of CCKAR mutants normalized to wild-type CCKAR (black line, thickness represents the SEM over n = 3).See also Figure S5 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'is periodically updated to hel p realize the goals of personal- ized medicine. Drugs and Targets that Are Affected due to Functional Site Variability Which receptors have polymorphisms in a signicant fraction of their functional sites? For this, we analyzed the ExAC data andidentied receptors that show most and least variation in known functional sites. On average, each receptor harbors at least one polymorphism in 23% of the known functional sites ( Table S5 ). Among the highly variable GPCR drug targets are the somato-statin SST 5receptor (SSTR5), cholecystokinin A receptor (CCKAR), dopamine D 5receptor (DRD5), and the calcitonin receptor (CALCR), all of which display amino acid alterations inmore than 40% of the known functional sites ( Figure 6 A). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Thus, for some receptors, the high incidence of variation (i.e., fraction of known functional sites with a MV) makes drug effects morelikely, whereas the drug targets with less variability could be expected to maintain the expected drug response. We then developed a score for each drug to rank them based on howlikely they are to manifest altered response due to variability in the fraction of known functional site in its drug target(s) ( Table S6). We nd that ergoloid (for treating cardiovascular disease), olanzapine, and asenapine (both for treating schizophrenia) aredrugs whose targets are most variable and thus are more likely to manifest variable response ( Table S6 ). What fraction of the human population is likely to carry a variant GPCR drug target with a mutation in a known or putative functional site? We nd that on average, 3.1% of the 2,504 indi- viduals in the 1000 Genomes Project carry at least one allele witha missense variation in a known functional site in any given GPCR drug target (11.9% in known or putative functional site; Table S5 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'For instance, over 86% and 69% of the individuals carry at least one allele with a missense mutation in a knownfunctional site in the cannabinoid receptor 2 (CNR2) and glucagon like peptide 1 (GLP1) receptor, respectively, that are targeted by the common antiemetic nabilone, and several anti-diabetic drugs such as exenatide. In line with what we observed form-opioid receptor variants, this suggests that a substantial fraction of the population might carry variant receptors andremain healthy but have the potential to display differences in drug response when treated with a drug. Using the genotype information of mutations in known and putative functional sites,we ranked drugs whose targets are most variable (i.e., fraction of population) in their functional sites and thus are more likely to manifest different response ( Table S6 ). The information and the framework that we describe here can be used to prioritize drugs ( Table S6 ) for pharmacovigilance in- vestigations by regulatory bodies, post-market follow-up studies such as in drug repurposing efforts, as well as in personalizingprescriptions (e.g., dose, treatment regime, etc.). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The informa- tion on the spectrum and prevalence of receptor variation ( Table S5) can also be used for patient stratication of those entering clinical trials in order to maximize success in clinical outcomes. Possible Economic Impact of Drug Target Variability Just in the UK alone, the National Health Service spent /C241.7 billion pounds in primary care for GPCR targeting drugsin 2016 ( /C2421% of all drug cost). What is the economic burden of drug cost associated with genetic variation in GPCR drug tar- gets? For this, we investigated all the 279 FDA-approved drugs that are prescribed actively in the UK, the number of prescribeditems for a 6-year duration as available in the National Health Service health records (201117), and the cost associated with prescriptions. Drugs that are highly prescribed bind to receptorsthat are polymorphic within known and putative functional sitesin the human population ( Figure 6 B). We nd the same trend when considering LoF and CNVs ( Figures S7 A and S7B). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'For example, the highly polymorphic drug target, m-opioid receptor, mediates the effect of morphine, tramadol, codeine, buprenor- phine, and fentanyl among other drugs (n = 22) that are prescribed over 4 million times each month and account for salesof more than 432 million British Pounds (GBP) per year just in the UK. Even if a small fraction (7%, from Table S5 ) of these prescrip- tions are ineffective or lead to unexpected adverse reactions,such a difference may contribute to a differentially effective treat-ment outcome and a signicant economic burden (an estimate of /C2430 million GBP per year in the UK alone). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'To analyze each drug, their GPCR targets, polymorphisms within drug targets, National Health Service prescription and sales data, prescription statistics, affected individuals considering known and putative functional sites as well as homo-zygosity/heterozygosity, and economic burden estimates, we present an interactive resource at http://gpcrdb.org/mutational_ landscape/economicburden . In this simplistic estimate of eco- nomic burden ( STAR Methods ), each prescription is treated as being made for a separate individual due to patient anonymity (i.e., we do not account for the recurrent prescription of thesame individual). Furthermore, information about the dose perprescription, and how this has been altered based on patient response is not considered. While we do not independently weigh the variables in our equation, at the level of an individual,the estimates can be higher or lower depending on the exact response due to the polymorphism (i.e., known and putative functional site, homozygosity, heterozygosity, neutral, loss- orgain-of-function effects) and the patients alternative manage- ment by the National Health Service. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Providing a broad estimate, in the UK, the possible economic burden on the National Health Service due to ineffective pre-scription of drugs targeting GPCRs could range between 14 million (considering % of individuals with both alleles having a mutation only in known functional sites) and 501 million(considering % of individuals with at least one allele having a mutation in known or putative functional sites) GBP annually (Figure 6 C;Table S7 ;STAR Methods ). These estimates do not take into account other sources of economic burden such as hospital prescriptions, nature of the illness (e.g., chronic v/s short-term treatment for acute disease), age of patient (i.e.,life-years of treatment), mutations outside of the coding region that affect drug target expression level, associated additional patient care and additional hospital costs in the case of adversedrug reaction. The calculations suggest that polymorphisms inGPCR drug targets may constitute a substantial, unaccounted healthcare expense. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 10, 'content': '0100200300400500 homo zygousall variantshomo zygousall variantsestimated economic burden  on the NHS per year (, in million)  analgesics antidepressant drugs antihistamines and antiallergics betaadrenoceptor blocking drugs bronchodilators drugs altering gut motility drugs for genitourinary disordersdrugs used in diabetes drugs used in parkinson/related disorders drugs used in psychoses & relelated disordersdrugs used in substance dependence hormones & antagonists in malignant disease hypothalamic & pituitary hormones other treatment of glaucoma501 m 103 m 66 m 14 malfuzosin amiodaroneamitriptyline aripiprazole asenapinebisoprolol buprenorphinecandesartan cilexetil carvedilol cinacalcetclopidogrel codeine desmopressindoxazosin dronedarone ephedrineepinephrine ergoloidergotamineexenatidefluoxetine goserelin indoramin isomethepteneitraconazolelabetalollevodopa levomepromazineliraglutidemelatonin midodrinemirtazapine naphazolineolanzapine oxycodone pergolide phenylpropanolaminepimozidepraz', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 10, 'content': 'osinpromazine pseudoephedrinequetiapinesalbutamol salmeterol solifenacintamsulosin terazosintiotropiumtramadol trazodone trifluoperazinetrimipramine xylometazoline zuclopenthixol 1101001000 50 100 150 200 max of no. of missense variation in a known and putative functional site of receptors targeted by the drugno. of prescribed items per month in the NHS 0246sales volume per month inNHS (million GBP)5HT1A 5HT1B 5HT1D 5HT1F5HT2A 5HT2B5HT2C 5HT4R 5HT6R5HT7R AA1RAA2AR AA2BR AA3RACM1 ACM2ACM3 ACM4 ACM5 ACTHRADA1A ADA1B ADA1D ADA2BADA2CADRB1ADRB2 ADRB3 AGTR1 BKRB1CALCR CASR CCKARCCR5CLTR1CNR1 CNR2DRD1DRD2 DRD3 DRD4 DRD5 EDNRA EDNRBFSHRGABR1 GABR2 GHRHRGLP1RGNRHR HCAR2HRH1 HRH2 LSHRMTR1A MTR1B NK1ROPRD OPRKOPRM OXYRP2Y12 PE2R1 PE2R2PE2R3 PF2RPI2R PTH1R PTH2RS1PR1SMOSSR1SSR2 SSR3SSR5 TAAR1V1AR V1BRV2R 110100 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 fraction of receptor length with missense variation in a known functional siteno. of FDAapproved drugs (logscale) 102030no. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 10, 'content': 'of distinct missense variantsin knownfunctional sitesA C E = f(C,P) Where, E = Estimated economic burden per drug per year () C = NHS cost per drug per year ()P = % individuals with a MV in a functional site        of the respective drug targetknown known + putative Functional  sitesB (103)Figure 6. Drugs, GPCR Functional Site Variability, and Associated Economic Impact (A) Number of FDA-approved drugs (y axis, log-scale) against their missense mutation density within known functional sites(x axis) for GPCR drug targets. Color represents the totalnumber of missense variants for each receptor within knownfunctional sites as seen in the ExAC dataset.(B) Number of prescribed items by the National HealthService each month (y axis, log-scale) against the maximumnumber of missense variations in known and putative func-tional sites of its therapeutic GPCR target for each FDA-approved drug. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 10, 'content': 'UK sales volume is shown in million GBP permonth.(C) Estimated economic burden on the National HealthService per year due to ineffective drug prescription ( STAR Methods ). Please see Table S7 for each drug. See also Figures S6 andS7. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 11, 'content': 'potential to curtail the recurrent, unaccounted expenditure on public health. Future studies should carefully collect more information and consider various factors such as the exact effect of heterozy- gous nature of a receptor polymorphism (i.e., loss of function,gain of function, buffering), the dose and ways in which drugs are prescribed (e.g., repeat prescriptions), efcacy is measuredin clinical practice, and drug kinetics (that will vary in different in- dividuals). These factors will be different depending on the drug,receptor, individual, disease, country and medical practice, and need to be considered for each receptor and drug independently to obtain robust estimates of economic burden due to variabledrug response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 11, 'content': 'We hope that the resource and analysis platform that we present here and our estimates using a simplistic model variant responsewild type responsedrugendogenous ligand (E)drug compound (D) response wild-typeReceptorA Beffector binding interfaceresidues in activationpathwayligand bindinginterface variant receptor positions influencing D positions influencing E and Dpositions influencing EED outcomesED altered response normal response  dose responseincreased responsedesired therapeutic effect reduced responsenormal response dose response Figure 7. GPCR Variants Can Contribute to Altered Drug Response (A) Receptor response outcome upon binding to an endogenous ligand binding (E) and upon drug treatment (D). A receptor variant may induce phenotype-a ltering (e.g., disease) perturbations (endogenous ligand) and/or altered drug response (and combinations thereof). The position of the missense variatio n (top right) renders its effect. Some mutations may have no effect on the binding of the endogenous ligand or the drug and are entirely neutral. Mutations in/near th e ligand- binding interface might affect endogenous ligand signaling, drug response, or both. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Mutations in the effector-binding interface (G protein/arres tin) most likely affect both endogenous ligand signaling and drug response.(B) Differences in drug response due to different mutations between individuals in a population. The drug target variation spectrum may differently affect individual drug responses by potentially altering ligand potencies and efcacies, receptor conformation, surface expression, and/or biasing signaling. Per sonalized target sequencing could facilitate prognosis of a patients drug response. Additionally, pharmacological characterization of genetic variants that hav e been cataloged in humans could foster precision prescription.See also Figure S6 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'will inspire new and novel lines of investigations addressing this essential socio-economic and health problem. DISCUSSIONDespite the importance of GPCRs as a major family of drug targets, no receptor variants are included in the labeling informa-tion of drugs ( FDA, 2014; Thompson et al., 2014; Raimondi et al., 2017 ). Although most variants have minor consequences and are not described in the literature, even severe adverse effects areestimated to only be reported in 1%10% of cases ( Giacomini et al., 2007 ), possibly due to a lack of a single post-marketing surveillance system for registering such effects. Additionally,the effects that drugs produce are often confounded by drug-drug interactions due to their combinatorial use, overlap with disease symptoms, and general health status of the patient. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Disentangling the contribution of the variation with respect tothe disease condition or physiological differences and drug treatment outcomes can help understand how and why certain mutations are buffered under normal physiological conditionsin the healthy human population but could cause different re- sponses to drugs ( Figure 7 A). While signicant efforts are under way for generating large- scale information on genome variation, there is still a huge gap between generating such data and understanding the impact of genome variation ( Gallion et al., 2017 ). Moreover, there are limited experimental resources and efforts for mechanistic un-derstanding of the effects of natural variation. As a rst step, detailed characterization of the various polymorphisms in a given GPCR with different doses of FDA-approved drugs from the rele-vant cells and in native condition can provide insights into predicting individual responses, leading to more precise pre- scriptions ( Figure 7 B). Genetic factors and polymorphisms outside of the coding region can aggravate or alleviate drug response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'For instance, synonymous substitutions in exons and mutations within intronscan affect splicing patterns; mutations in the inter-genic region can affect regulatory elements and inuence the expression levels of drug targets ( Ward and Kellis, 2012 ), both of which can affect drug response. Variation in downstream effectors(e.g., G proteins, arrestin, GRKs) or enzymes that metabolizes drugs (e.g., cytochrome P450) or those that regulate drug uptake can contribute to altered drug reaction ( Evans and McLeod, 2003 ). Other factors such as difference in drug absorption, food effects, tissue distribution, clearance, drug administration compliance, as well as heterogeneity in the disease etiologycan all contribute to variability in drug response ( Sim and Ingel- man-Sundberg, 2011; Lauschke et al., 2017 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'On the other end of the spectrum, buffering mutations, epistatic interactions,allele-specic expression, and the heterozygous nature of themutations within an individual might minimize the potential effects of a polymorphism in a drug target under normal drug- free conditions ( Lappalainen et al., 2011; Kukurba et al., 2014; Miosge et al., 2015 ). Thus, it is important to characterize all rele- vant mutations in the human population, in the right experimental setting, to delineate the direct effects of polymorphisms on drugresponses while addressing these issues on a receptor-by-re- ceptor and drug-by-drug basis.Until recently, drug prescriptions had not been guided by pharmacogenomics, due to the cost and complexity needed to identify, analyze, and interpret genetic variation data ( Relling and Evans, 2015 ). With the advent of sequencing technology and increased international efforts such as the 1000 Genomes Project, ExAC/gnomAD, Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, among others, we are in a unique position with unprecedentedaccess to the vast information on polymorphisms in the healthyand diseased individuals. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Characterizing the effects of such var- iants can be an important step in the design and interpretation of clinical trial studies and could be translated into pre-clinicaltesting to minimize adverse effects based on pharmacogenom- ics considerations at a much earlier stage. This can supersede the one-size-ts-all approach in drug treatment, help to prioritizedrugs for post-marketing follow-up studies and thus can serve as an important step to personalized optimization of the dosing for already-approved drugs. In light of the guidelines provided by the FDA for labeling drugs (US Food and Drug Administration, 2013 ), the ndings presented here underscore the importance of characterizing the drug target variants for personalized medicine. Furthermore, access to com-plete genotype data will be critical to assess the individual risk, prevalence of variation, and their potential impact on adverse drug response. Characterizing variants has the potential to alsoshed light into receptor biology and help discover principles of how different ligands (e.g., agonists, antagonists, etc.) mediate signaling by binding at allosteric and orthosteric sites. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Effortssuch as the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Con- sortium, Ubiquitous Pharmacogenomics, Pharmacogenomics Research Network, among others are already under way. Dedi-cated, large-scale efforts, similar to the ENCODE project, for phar-macological characterization of the variants of drug targets would be vital to accomplish this goal. The conceptual framework pre- sented here can be adapted to study other drugs and drug targetssuch as ion channels, kinases, and nuclear receptors. We hope that the ndings from our study and the resource that we present will fuel and equip further advances in personalized medicine. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 12, 'content': 'STAR+METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: dKEY RESOURCES TABLE dCONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING dEXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS BCell Lines and Tissue Culture dMETHOD DETAILS BUse of generic residue numbering systems to compareGPCR positions BDatasets BEstimation of putative functional impact of variants inGPCR drug targets BEngineered in vitro mutations BClinical annotations BAllele-specic expression data BFraction of receptor length with a polymorphism or population with variant receptor Cell172, 4154, January 11, 2018 51', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'BDrug scores for prioritization BNational Health Service prescription data BEstimation of economic burden BInteraction interface, functional, and structural site assignment BPharmacological validation dQUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS BPharmacological validation dESTIMATION OF STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE BEnrichment of receptors with allele-specic expression BEnrichment of MVs in known functional site BStatistical signicance for overlap between known and putative functional sites BStatistical signicance for putative functional sites in different structural segments dDATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY BData and code availability dADDITIONAL RESOURCES BMissense variation mapping of specic receptors SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven gures and seven tables and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.033 . A video abstract is available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.11. 033#mmc8 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS A.S.H. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'and M.M.B. designed the project, analyzed the data, interpreted the re- sults, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and provided inputs on themanuscript. A.S.H. compiled the datasets, wrote scripts, implemented andperformed the calculations, made gures, and developed the web services.S.C. was involved in the compilation of variation data, permutation test, andcalculation of allele-specic expression and making the relevant gures.L.J.J. curated clinical associations. I.M. and K.A.M. performed the experi-ments, analyzed the data, and contributed to writing the experimental sectionof the manuscript. D.E.G. provided critical inputs on the project, manuscriptwriting, and data analysis. M.M.B. initiated, managed, and set the directionof research for the project. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank J. Gough, R. Henderson, M. Andersen, S. Foster, T. Flock, and H. Harbrecht for comments on the manuscript and S. Bird specically for herconstructive comments on the economic burden estimates. We thankH. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Schio th, M. Attwood, and M. Rask-Andersen for their input on the drug- GPCR dataset and N. Skamangas for assistance with experiments. We thankthe various consortia members and the National Health Service for making the data publicly available. This work was supported by the Medical Research Council (MC_U105185859; M.M.B. and S.C.), the European Research Council(DE-ORPHAN 639125; D.E.G. and A.S.H.), NIH grants DA036596 andDA026405 (K.A.M.), and the Lundbeck Foundation (R163-2013-16327;D.E.G. and A.S.H.). L.J.J. is supported by the European Unions Horizon2020 research innovation programme (Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agree-ment no. 642738, MetaRNA). M.M.B. is a Research Prize Fellow of the ListerInstitute of Preventive Medicine. Received: May 11, 2017 Revised: September 11, 2017Accepted: November 16, 2017Published: December 14, 2017REFERENCES Adzhubei, I., Jordan, D.M., and Sunyaev, S.R. (2013). Predicting functional ef- fect of human missense mutations using PolyPhen-2. Curr. Protoc. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Hum.Genet. Chapter 7 , Unit 7.20 . Allen, J.A., and Roth, B.L. (2011). Strategies to discover unexpected targets for drugs active at G protein-coupled receptors. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.51, 117144 . Auton, A., Brooks, L.D., Durbin, R.M., Garrison, E.P., Kang, H.M., Korbel, J.O., Marchini, J.L., McCarthy, S., McVean, G.A., and Abecasis, G.R.; 1000Genomes Project Consortium (2015). A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526, 6874 . Boucrot, E., Ferreira, A.P.A., Almeida-Souza, L., Debard, S., Vallis, Y., Howard, G., Bertot, L., Sauvonnet, N., and McMahon, H.T. (2015). Endophilin marksand controls a clathrin-independent endocytic pathway. Nature 517, 460465 . Boyer, E.W. (2012). Management of opioid analgesic overdose. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 146155 . Chen, B., Brinkmann, K., Chen, Z., Pak, C.W., Liao, Y., Shi, S., Henry, L., Grishin, N.V., Bogdan, S., and Rosen, M.K. (2014). The WAVE regulatory com-plex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Cell 156, 195207 . Congreve, M., Oswald, C., and Marshall, F.H. (2017). Applying structure- based drug design approaches to allosteric modulators of GPCRs. TrendsPharmacol. Sci. 38, 837847 . Costa-Neto, C.M., Parreiras-E-Silva, L.T., and Bouvier, M. (2016). A pluridi- mensional view of biased agonism. Mol. Pharmacol. 90, 587595 . DataLab-EBM (2017). https://openprescribing.net/ . Doln, E., Guani, B., Lussiana, C., Mari, C., Restagno, G., and Revelli, A. (2011). FSH-receptor Ala307Thr polymorphism is associated to polycysticovary syndrome and to a higher responsiveness to exogenous FSH in Italianwomen. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 28, 925930 . Dufresne, M., Seva, C., and Fourmy, D. (2006). Cholecystokinin and gastrin re- ceptors. Physiol. Rev. 86, 805847 . Evans, W.E., and McLeod, H.L. (2003). Pharmacogenomicsdrug disposi- tion, drug targets, and side effects. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 538549 . FDA (2014). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Drugs Table of Pharmacogenomic Biomarkers in Drug Labeling, https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ScienceResearch/ucm572698.htm . Flock, T., Ravarani, C.N.J., Sun, D., Venkatakrishnan, A.J., Kayikci, M., Tate, C.G., Veprintsev, D.B., and Babu, M.M. (2015). Universal allosteric mechanismfor Gaactivation by GPCRs. Nature 524, 173179 . Flock, T., Hauser, A.S., Lund, N., Gloriam, D.E., Balaji, S., and Babu, M.M. (2017). Selectivity determinants of GPCR-G-protein binding. Nature 545, 317322 . Gahbauer, S., and Bo ckmann, R.A. (2016). Membrane-mediated oligomeriza- tion of G protein coupled receptors and its implications for GPCR function. Front. Physiol. 7, 494 . Gallion, J., Koire, A., Katsonis, P., Schoenegge, A.-M., Bouvier, M., and Lich- targe, O. (2017). Predicting phenotype from genotype: Improving accuracythrough more robust experimental and computational modeling. Hum. Mutat.38, 569580 . Giacomini, K.M., Krauss, R.M., Roden, D.M., Eichelbaum, M., Hayden, M.R., and Nakamura, Y. (2007). When good drugs go bad. Nature 446, 975977 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Gupta, K., Donlan, J.A.C., Hopper, J.T.S., Uzdavinys, P., Landreh, M., Struwe, W.B., Drew, D., Baldwin, A.J., Stansfeld, P.J., and Robinson, C.V. (2017). Therole of interfacial lipids in stabilizing membrane protein oligomers. Nature 541, 421424 . Hauser, A.S., Misty, A., Mathias, R.-A., Schio th, H.B., and Gloriam, D.E. (2017). Trends in GPCR drug discovery: new agents, targets and indications. Nat. Rev.Drug Disc. 16, 829842 . Hollins, B., Kuravi, S., Digby, G.J., and Lambert, N.A. (2009). The c-terminus of GRK3 indicates rapid dissociation of G protein heterotrimers. Cell. Signal. 21, 10151021 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Hornbeck, P.V., Zhang, B., Murray, B., Kornhauser, J.M., Latham, V., and Skrzypek, E. (2015). PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: mutations, PTMs and recalibra-tions. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D512D520 . Huang, K.Y., Su, M.G., Kao, H.J., Hsieh, Y.C., Jhong, J.H., Cheng, K.H., Huang, H.D., and Lee, T.Y. (2016). dbPTM 2016: 10-year anniversary of aresource for post-translational modication of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res.44(D1), D435D446 . Isberg, V., de Graaf, C., Bortolato, A., Cherezov, V., Katritch, V., Marshall, F.H., Mordalski, S., Pin, J.-P.P., Stevens, R.C., Vriend, G., and Gloriam, D.E. (2015).Generic GPCR residue numbersaligning topology maps while minding thegaps. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 36, 2231 . Johnson, J.A. (2008). Ethnic differences in cardiovascular drug response: Po- tential contribution of pharmacogenetics. Circulation 118, 13831393 . Jubb, H.C., Higueruelo, A.P., Ochoa-Montan o, B., Pitt, W.R., Ascher, D.B., and Blundell, T.L. (2017). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Arpeggio: A web server for calculating and visualisinginteratomic interactions in protein structures. J. Mol. Biol. 429, 365371 . Kang, Y., Zhou, X.E., Gao, X., He, Y., Liu, W., Ishchenko, A., Barty, A., White, T.A., Yefanov, O., Han, G.W., et al. (2015). Crystal structure of rhodopsinbound to arrestin by femtosecond X-ray laser. Nature 523, 561567 . Katritch, V., Fenalti, G., Abola, E.E., Roth, B.L., Cherezov, V., and Stevens, R.C. (2014). Allosteric sodium in class A GPCR signaling. Trends Biochem.Sci.39, 233244 . Koscielny, G., An, P., Carvalho-Silva, D., Cham, J.A., Fumis, L., Gasparyan, R., Hasan, S., Karamanis, N., Maguire, M., Papa, E., et al. (2017). Open Targets:A platform for therapeutic target identication and validation. Nucleic AcidsRes. 45, D985D994 . Kukurba, K.R., Zhang, R., Li, X., Smith, K.S., Knowles, D.A., How Tan, M., Pis- kol, R., Lek, M., Snyder, M., Macarthur, D.G., et al. (2014). Allelic expression ofdeleterious protein-coding variants across human tissues. PLoS Genet. 10. Published online May 1, 2014. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004304 . Lappalainen, T., Montgomery, S.B., Nica, A.C., and Dermitzakis, E.T. (2011). Epistatic selection between coding and regulatory variation in human evolutionand disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89, 459463 . Lauschke, V.M., Milani, L., and Ingelman-Sundberg, M. (2017). Pharmacoge- nomic Biomarkers for Improved Drug Therapy-Recent Progress and FutureDevelopments. Published online November 27, 2017. https://doi.org/10. 1208/s12248-017-0161-x . Law, V., Knox, C., Djoumbou, Y., Jewison, T., Guo, A.C., Liu, Y., Maciejewski, A., Arndt, D., Wilson, M., Neveu, V., et al. (2014). DrugBank 4.0: shedding newlight on drug metabolism. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, D1091D1097 . Lek, M., Karczewski, K.J., Minikel, E.V., Samocha, K.E., Banks, E., Fennell, T., ODonnell-Luria, A.H., Ware, J.S., Hill, A.J., Cummings, B.B., et al.; Exome Ag-gregation Consortium (2016). Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in60,706 humans. Nature 536, 285291 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Liang, Y.-L., Khoshouei, M., Radjainia, M., Zhang, Y., Glukhova, A., Tarrasch, J., Thal, D.M., Furness, S.G.B., Christopoulos, G., Coudrat, T., et al. (2017).Phase-plate cryo-EM structure of a class B GPCR-G-protein complex. Nature546, 118123 . Liggett, S.B., Mialet-Perez, J., Thaneemit-Chen, S., Weber, S.A., Greene, S.M., Hodne, D., Nelson, B., Morrison, J., Domanski, M.J., Wagoner, L.E.,et al. (2006). A polymorphism within a conserved beta(1)-adrenergic receptormotif alters cardiac function and beta-blocker response in human heart failure.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 1128811293 . Masuho, I., Ostrovskaya, O., Kramer, G.M., Jones, C.D., Xie, K., and Marte- myanov, K.A. (2015a). Distinct proles of functional discrimination amongG proteins determine the actions of G protein-coupled receptors. Sci. Signal.8, ra123 . Masuho, I., Martemyanov, K.A., and Lambert, N.A. (2015b). Monitoring G pro- tein activation in cells with BRET. Methods Mol. Biol. 1335 , 107113 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Mialet Perez, J., Rathz, D.A., Petrashevskaya, N.N., Hahn, H.S., Wagoner, L.E., Schwartz, A., Dorn, G.W., and Liggett, S.B. (2003). b1-adrenergic recep- tor polymorphisms confer differential function and predisposition to heart fail-ure. Nat. Med. 9, 13001305 .Miosge, L.A., Field, M.A., Sontani, Y., Cho, V., Johnson, S., Palkova, A., Bala- kishnan, B., Liang, R., Zhang, Y., Lyon, S., et al. (2015). Comparison ofpredicted and actual consequences of missense mutations. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. USA 112, E5189E5198 . Munk, C., Isberg, V., Mordalski, S., Harpse, K., Rataj, K., Hauser, A.S., Kolb, P., Bojarski, A.J., Vriend, G., and Gloriam, D.E. (2016a). GPCRdb: the G pro- tein-coupled receptor database - an introduction. Br. J. Pharmacol. 173, 21952207 . Munk, C., Harpse, K., Hauser, A.S., Isberg, V., and Gloriam, D.E. (2016b). Integrating structural and mutagenesis data to elucidate GPCR ligand binding.Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 30, 5158 . Ng, P.C., and Henikoff, S. (2003). SIFT: Predicting amino acid changes that affect protein function. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 38123814 . Orman, J.S., and Keating, G.M. (2009). Spotlight on buprenorphine/naloxone in the treatment of opioid dependence. CNS Drugs 23, 899902 . Pandy-Szekeres, G., Munk, C., Tsonkov, T.M., Mordalski, S., Harpse, K., Hauser, A.S., and Gloriam, D.E. (2017). GPCRdb in 2018: adding GPCR struc-ture models and ligands. Nucleic Acids Res. Published online November 16,2017. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx1109 . Raimondi, F., Betts, M.J., Lu, Q., Inoue, A., Gutkind, J.S., and Russell, R.B. (2017). Genetic variants affecting equivalent protein family positions reect hu- man diversity. Sci. Rep. 7, 12771 . Rask-Andersen, M., Masuram, S., and Schio th, H.B. (2014). The druggable genome: Evaluation of drug targets in clinical trials suggests major shifts in mo-lecular class and indication. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 54, 926 . Rasmussen, S.G.F., DeVree, B.T., Zou, Y., Kruse, A.C., Chung, K.Y., Kobilka, T.S., Thian, F.S., Chae, P.S., Pardon, E., Calinski, D., et al. (2011). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Crystalstructure of the b2 adrenergic receptor-Gs protein complex. Nature 477, 549555 . Raveh, A., Cooper, A., Guy-David, L., and Reuveny, E. (2010). Nonenzymatic rapid control of GIRK channel function by a G protein-coupled receptor kinase.Cell143, 750760 . Relling, M.V., and Evans, W.E. (2015). Pharmacogenomics in the clinic. Nature 526, 343350 . Rieck, M., Schumacher-Schuh, A.F., Altmann, V., Callegari-Jacques, S.M., Rieder, C.R.M., and Hutz, M.H. (2016). Association between DRD2 andDRD3 gene polymorphisms and gastrointestinal symptoms induced by levo-dopa therapy in Parkinsons disease. Pharmacogenomics J. Roden, D.M., and George, A.L., Jr. (2002). The genetic basis of variability in drug responses. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 1, 3744 . Ruderfer, D.M., Hamamsy, T., Lek, M., Karczewski, K.J., Kavanagh, D., Samo- cha, K.E., Daly, M.J., MacArthur, D.G., Fromer, M., and Purcell, S.M.; Exome Aggregation Consortium (2016). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Patterns of genic intolerance of rare copynumber variation in 59,898 human exomes. Nat. Genet. 48, 11071111 . Santos, R., Ursu, O., Gaulton, A., Bento, A.P., Donadi, R.S., Bologa, C.G., Karlsson, A., Al-Lazikani, B., Hersey, A., Oprea, T.I., and Overington, J.P.(2017). A comprehensive map of molecular drug targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Dis-cov. 16, 1934 . Savova, V., Chun, S., Sohail, M., McCole, R.B., Witwicki, R., Gai, L., Lenz, T.L., Wu, C.T., Sunyaev, S.R., and Gimelbrant, A.A. (2016). Genes with monoallelicexpression contribute disproportionately to genetic diversity in humans. Nat.Genet. 48, 231237 . Sim, S.C., and Ingelman-Sundberg, M. (2011). Pharmacogenomic biomarkers: new tools in current and future drug therapy. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.32, 7281 . Smedley, D., Haider, S., Durinck, S., Pandini, L., Provero, P., Allen, J., Arnaiz, O., Awedh, M.H., Baldock, R., Barbiera, G., et al. (2015). The BioMart commu-nity portal: an innovative alternative to large, centralized data repositories.Nucleic Acids Res. 43, W589W598 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Southan, C., Sharman, J.L., Benson, H.E., Faccenda, E., Pawson, A.J., Alex- ander, S.P.H., Buneman, O.P., Davenport, A.P., McGrath, J.C., Peters, J.A.,et al.; NC-IUPHAR (2016). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 15, 'content': '2016: towards curated quantitative interactions between 1300 protein targets and 6000 ligands. Nucleic Acids Res. 44(D1), D1054D1068 . Sultana, J., Cutroneo, P., and Triro `, G. (2013). Clinical and economic burden of adverse drug reactions. J. Pharmacol. Pharmacother. 4(Suppl 1 ), S73S77 . The IDG Knowledge Management Center (2016). Unexplored opportunities in the druggable human genome. Nature Reviews, https://www.nature.com/nrd/ posters/druggablegenome/index.html . Thompson, M.D., Cole, D.E.C., Capra, V., Siminovitch, K.A., Rovati, G.E., Burnham, W.M., and Rana, B.K. (2014). Pharmacogenetics of the G protein-coupled receptors. Methods Mol. Biol. 1175 , 189242 . Trzaskowski, B., Latek, D., Yuan, S., Ghoshdastider, U., Debinski, A., and Fil- ipek, S. (2012). Action of molecular switches in GPCRstheoretical andexperimental studies. Curr. Med. Chem. 19, 10901109 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Turner, T.N., Yi, Q., Krumm, N., Huddleston, J., Hoekzema, K., F Stessman, H.A., Doebley, A.L., Bernier, R.A., Nickerson, D.A., and Eichler, E.E. (2017). de-novo-db: A compendium of human de novo variants. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D804D811 . US Food and Drug Administration (2013). Clinical Pharmacogenomics: Premarket Evaluation in Early-Phase Clinical Studies and Recommendationsfor Labeling, https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceCompliance RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM337169.pdf van der Lee, R., Buljan, M., Lang, B., Weatheritt, R.J., Daughdrill, G.W., Dunker, A.K., Fuxreiter, M., Gough, J., Gsponer, J., Jones, D.T., et al.(2014). Classication of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins. Chem. Rev. 114, 65896631 . Venkatakrishnan, A.J., Deupi, X., Lebon, G., Tate, C.G., Schertler, G.F., and Babu, M.M. (2013). Molecular signatures of G-protein-coupled receptors. Na-ture494, 185194 . Venkatakrishnan, A.J., Flock, T., Prado, D.E., Oates, M.E., Gough, J., and Ma- dan Babu, M. (2014). Structured and disordered facets of the GPCR fold. Curr.Opin. Struct. Biol. 27, 129137 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Venkatakrishnan, A.J., Deupi, X., Lebon, G., Heydenreich, F.M., Flock, T., Mil- jus, T., Balaji, S., Bouvier, M., Veprintsev, D.B., Tate, C.G., et al. (2016). Diverseactivation pathways in class A GPCRs converge near the G-protein-couplingregion. Nature 536, 484487 . Wacker, D., Wang, C., Katritch, V., Han, G.W., Huang, X.-P., Vardy, E., McCorvy, J.D., Jiang, Y., Chu, M., Siu, F.Y., et al. (2013). Structural featuresfor functional selectivity at serotonin receptors. Science 340, 615619 . Wacker, D., Stevens, R.C., and Roth, B.L. (2017). How ligands illuminate GPCR molecular pharmacology. Cell 170, 414427 . Ward, L.D., and Kellis, M. (2012). Interpreting noncoding genetic variation in complex traits and human disease. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 10951106 . Zhang, Y., Sun, B., Feng, D., Hu, H., Chu, M., Qu, Q., Tarrasch, J.T., Li, S., Sun Kobilka, T., Kobilka, B.K., and Skiniotis, G. (2017). Cryo-EM structureof the activated GLP-1 receptor in complex with a G protein. Nature 546, 248253 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 15, 'content': '54Cell172, 4154, January 11, 2018', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 16, 'content': 'STAR+METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins Endomorphin-1 Tocris Cat# 1055 Dynorphin A Abcam Cat# ab120412 Morphine Sigma Cat# M8777 Buprenorphine Sigma Cat# B9275 Naloxone Tocris Cat# 0599 Caerulein Toronto Research Chemicals Cat# C070000 Nano-Glo Luciferase Assay Substrate (furimazine)Promega Cat# N1120 Experimental Models: Cell Lines Human: HEK293T/17 cell ATCC Cat# CRL-11268 Recombinant DNA m-opioid receptor wt This paper N/A m-opioid receptor M153V This paper N/A m-opioid receptor K235M This paper N/A m-opioid receptor K235N This paper N/A m-opioid receptor V238I This paper N/A m-opioid receptor V302I This paper N/A CCKAR wt This paper N/A CCKAR R139I This paper N/A CCKAR Q148E This paper N/A CCKAR R150Q This paper N/A CCKAR R150W This paper N/A CCKAR E234K This paper N/A CCKAR N304H This paper N/ACCKAR V311E This paper N/A Gao Hiroshi Itoh N/A Gaq Hiroshi Itoh N/A Gas Hiroshi Itoh N/A Ga13 cDNA Resource Cent', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 16, 'content': 'er Cat# GNA1300001 Venus 156-239 G b1 PMID: 19258039 N/A Venus 1-155 G g2 PMID: 19258039 N/A masGRK3ct-Nluc PMID: 26628681 N/A PTX-S1 PMID: 21111235 N/A Software and Algorithms GPCRdb Pandy-Szekeres et al., 2017 https://github.com/protwis/protwis Python v2.7.13 and v3.4.3 Python Software Foundation https://www.python.org/ ; RRID: SCR_008394 R v3.4.1 R Core Team https://www.r-project.org/ Pandas v0.20.3 Wes McKinney http://pandas.pydata.org/ Engineered in vitro mutations Munk et al., 2016b http://www.gpcrdb.org/ ; RRID: SCR_007419 PyMol v1.8.0.6 Schrodinger http://pymol.org/2/ ; RRID: SCR_000305 Arpeggio Jubb et al., 2017 http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/arpeggioweb/ SigmaPlot v12.5 Systat Software http://www.sigmaplot.co.uk/ (Continued on next page ) Cell172, 4154.e1e8, January 11, 2018 e1', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 17, 'content': 'CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fullled by the Lead Contact, M. Madan Babu ( madanm@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk ). EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSCell Lines and Tissue Culture HEK293T/17 cells were grown in culture medium (Dulbeccos modied Eagles medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,MEM non-essential amino acids (Life Technologies), 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and antibiotics (100 units/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin) at 37 /C14C in a humidied incubator containing 5% CO 2. This cell line is derived from a female and was purchased from ATCC. METHOD DETAILS Use of generic residue numbering systems to compare GPCR positions In order to make the ndings presented here applicable to all GPCRs, the GPCRdb numbering system ( http://gpcrdb.org ) was used throughout this study ( Isberg et al., 2015 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 17, 'content': 'The structure-based GPCRdb numbering scheme is an adaption of the sequence-based Ballesteros-Weinstein scheme with corrections for helix bulges and constrictions. GPCRdb numbers are distinguished by a uniqueseparator x and may be used alone, e.g., 5x47, or together with one of the sequence-based schemes (such as Ballesteros-Wein- stein), e.g., 5.46x47. Cross-class comparisons of generic residue positions (note, that e.g., 6x50 in Class A does not correspond to 6x50 in Class B) were conducted according to a class residue translation table ( Isberg et al., 2015 ). The offset to the Class A x.50 to the corresponding Class B position can be deduced from following offsets: TM1-7: 4, 7, 4, 0, /C04, 5, 4. Class A to C is translated with the following offset for TM1-7: 4, /C04, 4, /C010, 0, 2, /C05. Class A to F is translated by TM1-7: /C03,/C01, 0, 0, 4, /C01, 0. For example, the Class C 4x50 position corresponds to the 4x60 position in Class A receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Datasets FDA-approved drugs and their GPCR targets All FDA-approved drugs and agents that are/were in clinical trials that target GPCRs were obtained from GPCRdb ( Hauser et al., 2017 ). In this list, every single FDA-approved drug-receptor interaction has a source reference article obtained via DrugBank (ver. 5.0.7) ( Law et al., 2014 ) and literature search. The respective references (PubMed IDs) are available as annotation. Other annotations include primary and secondary targets of approved drugs and additional targets that reached clinical trials. For the latter, informationabout whether it is still in clinical trials (ongoing) or terminated is provided. Approved agents that are close analogs of the equivalent endogenous ligands are noted. The list of drug-GPCR interactions is provided in Table S1 . Please see www.gpcrdb.org/drugs/ drugbrowser (for all drug-receptor pairings) and www.gpcrdb.org/drugs/drugmapping (for a GPCR drug target overview). The data- set from Hauser et al. ( Hauser et al., 2017 ) contains 475 FDA-approved drugs that target 108 GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Additionally, it contains 532 agents in clinical trials (discontinued and ongoing) targeting a total of 165 receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Of these, 66 receptors do not have any FDA- approved drug (i.e., not part of the 108 GPCR drug targets).Genotype dataTo estimate the number of coding loci with missense mutations (with respect to the reference human genome GRCh37/hg19) within the GPCR drug targets in an individual, we obtained genotype data for 2,504 individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project ( Auton et al.,Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Prism v6 GraphPad https://www.graphpad.com/ scientic-software/prism/ ChemDraw Professional v16.0 PerkinElmer http://www.cambridgesoft.com/ Clampt v10.3 Molecular Devices http://mdc.custhelp.com/ Other GPCRdb resource website for the GPCR Pharmacogenomics publicationThis paper https://github.com/AlexanderHauser/ protwis/tree/SNP Custom scripts for analysis This paper https://github.com/AlexanderHauser/ GPCR-Pharmacogenomics Deposited Data Mendeley dataset This paper https://doi.org/10.17632/pr5v9t8z36.1 e2Cell172, 4154.e1e8, January 11, 2018', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': '2015 ). Each of the genomes of the 2,504 individuals was separately investigated for missense variants in GPCR drug targets and their clinical association with altered drug response in literature. De novo mutations data To estimate the de novo missense mutation rate within GPCR drug targets, we obtained de novo mutations from 1,762 control trios (without any reported pathological conditions) compiled from ten different studies from denovo-db ( Turner et al., 2017 ). Genetic variation data We retrieved natural genetic variation data for all GPCRs from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), which compiled exome-sequencing data from various large-scale cohorts spanning 60,706 unrelated individuals from 6 distinct human populations. We ex-tracted polymorphism data for the coding-region of the 108 GPCR drug targets and GPCRs that reached clinical trials (n = 66) via their respective Ensembl transcript IDs as used in the GPCRdb (Table S5 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Minor Allele frequencies (MAFs) were calculated as the ratio of allele counts of the less frequent allele to the total number of alleles at that locus. Each variant was mapped to its respective structuralsegment (e.g., transmembrane regions, intra-cellular loops, extra-cellular loops, etc.), generic residue position (i.e., GPCRdb numbering), receptor class, ligand-type and family classication according to the GuideToPharmacology ( Southan et al., 2016 ) and GPCRdb ( Munk et al., 2016a ) using custom R and python pandas scripts. Densities (number of MVs normalized to the protein length) were calculated using the respective protein length. Missense variants were categorised into changed and similar depending on whether the amino acid substitution switched dened categories such as hydrophobic (A, C, F, I, L, M, V, W, Y), aromatic (F, H, W, Y), polar uncharged (S, T,N, Q), helix breakers(P, G), negative (D, E) and positive (H, K, R) or remained within the same category. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Loss of function (LoF) mutations wasextracted by ltering for essential splice sites, gained stop codon or frameshift mutations. As no genotype data were available, to calculate the number of individuals with a LoF mutation, we estimated the minimum number of individuals with LoF mutations. For this, we extracted positions within a GPCR drug target with the highest allele count for LoF mutations and corrected for homo-zygous individuals (i.e., the number of homozygotes were subtracted from the total allele count to arrive at the number of heterozy- gous individuals). This number (minimum population frequency) reects the minimum number of heterozygous individuals, who carry at least one LoF mutation in a GPCR drug target. Copy number variations (CNVs) were analyzed from 59,898 human exomes for allGPCR drug targets ( Ruderfer et al., 2016 ). For a total of 82 receptor genes out of the 108 GPCR drug targets, CNVs could be con- dently called. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': 'We calculated the z-score for each category (number of missense variants, missense variant density, number of loss of functions, loss of function minimum population frequency, number of deletions and number of duplications) by z/C0score = x/C0m s where: x is the observed value for the category considered. mis the mean of the 108 GPCR drug targets in a given category. sis the standard deviation of the 108 GPCR drug targets in a given category. The absolute value of the z-score represents the distance between the individual observed value and the population mean in units of standard deviation. We then used hierarchical clustering heatmap.20from gplots in R to identify receptors that are highly poly- morphic in multiple mutation categories ( Figure S1 B). Estimation of putative functional impact of variants in GPCR drug targets An analysis of the putative functional impact of variants was obtained using SIFT ( Ng and Henikoff, 2003 ) (sorting intolerant from tolerant) and PolyPhen ( Adzhubei et al., 2013 ) (polymorphism phenotyping). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': 'A missense variant position was classied as a putative functional site if SIFT (0-1; 0-0.05: deleterious, > 0.05: tolerated) or PolyPhen outcome (0-1; 0-0.1: benign, 0.1-0.2: possibly damaging, > 0.2: probably damaging) predicted a deleterious or possibly damaging outcome. This resulted in the identication of9,522 variants (referred to as putative functional sites). Engineered in vitro mutations Data on 28,779 experimentally characterized in vitro mutations was retrieved from the GPCRdb ( Pandy-Szekeres et al., 2017 ). From this dataset, we extracted 9240 mutants for human receptor constructs and with reported effect values on ligand afnity/potency. This includes experimental values for different ligands for a total of 1,996 distinct receptor positions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Additionally, all experimental data obtained by investigating orthologous receptors from related species such as mouse, rat, hamster, dog, pig and rhesus ma-caque were included if the corresponding generic structural-alignment position in the human receptor was identical in amino acid (Isberg et al., 2015 ). The combined dataset comprised of 13,223 mutants in 68 distinct receptors and a total of 928 unique ligands. We then looked for identical amino acid substitutions (same receptor, position, wild-type and mutant amino acid) that mimicked anaturally occurring variant in the ExAC dataset for the 108 GPCR drug targets. In cases where there were multiple data points, we considered maximum fold changes. ( Table S4 ). A cut-off of 5-fold for the maximal absolute fold changes was applied for experimental in vitro support of impact on drug response ( Munk et al., 2016b ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Clinical annotations Clinical information about missense variant-drug pairs with reported changes in efcacy, dosage or toxicity/ADR were manually curated from the literature and PharmGKB, which aggregates the impact of human genetic variation on drug response ( https:// www.pharmgkb.org/ ). We obtained the level of evidence for each association as listed in PharmGKB. If it was not available, we as- signed the evidence level based on PharmGKB criteria ( https://www.pharmgkb.org/page/clinAnnLevels ), so as to guide the reader in terms of the evidence that is available for a particular clinical association with a receptor variant. All gures and text referring to clinical associations have been limited to a level of evidence of 3 or above (3, 2 and 1). In this annotation scheme, 4 is the lowest level ofevidence and 1 is the highest level of evidence. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Disease annotations were extracted from the indications in the drugs@FDA database(https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/ )or the actual study that reported the altered drug response. Higher disease ontology categories were assigned using the Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) retrieved from the Open Targets database (Koscielny et al., 2017 ). Corresponding positions and amino acid substitutions of reported SNP identiers were retrieved using BioMart for the canonical transcripts as stored in GPCRdb ( Table S5 )(Smedley et al., 2015 ). Network analysis between disease categories, drugs and missense variants were done using Cytoscape 3.4. Allele-specic expression data We obtained information on allele-specic expression of genes from published literature ( Savova et al., 2016 ). Briey, genes were classied as those with monoallelic and biallelic expression, by integrating gene-expression data and specic chromatin signaturesof gene expression (co-occurrence of silencing mark on Histone H3K27me3 and active mark H3K36me3 on the gene body) in sixdifferent cell types. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'We assessed for enrichment of GPCR drug targets among genes with monoallelic expression using permutation test. Fraction of receptor length with a polymorphism or population with variant receptor For each of the GPCR drug targets we calculated: (i) the ratio of receptor length with missense variation in a known functional sites per GPCR drug target using the ExAC data ( Table S5 ) and (ii) the fraction of affected individuals in the human population (n = 2,504; based on the 1000 Genomes Project dataset, Table S5 ). The fraction of affected individuals was calculated using four different criteria by considering individuals who have a variation in (i) known functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), (ii) known functional sites in at least one allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous), (iii) known or putative functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), and (iv)known or putative functional sites in at least one allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Known functional sites include ligand binding, effector binding, post-translational modication site, sodium binding site and micro-switches. Putative functional sites include those predicted to be deleterious based on SIFT or PolyPhen. Drug scores for prioritization We developed a score for each FDA-approved drug (n = 475) to rank them based on how likely they are to manifest altered response due to the prevalence of known functional site variability of its target(s) in the human population. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'The drug score ( Table S6 ) based on the fraction of known functional site that are polymorphic in a drug target using the ExAC data was calculated by: variability score for a drug ;S polymorphic =X fraction of known functional sites that are polymorphic for each receptor targeted by the drug The drug score ( Table S6 )based on prevalence of affected individual (i.e., 1000 Genomes Project) was calculated by: variability score for a drug ;Saffected %=fraction of affected individuals with a MV in a functional site of the respective drug target s The fraction of affected individuals was calculated using four different criteria by considering individuals who have a variation in (i) known functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), which is the most conservative, (ii) known functional sites in at least one allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous), (iii) known or putative functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), and (iv) known or putative functional sites in at least one allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous), which is the least conservative. National Health Service prescription data Every month, the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK publishes anonymised data about the drugs prescribed by general prac-titioners. National Health Service data were retrieved from openprescribing.net (DataLab-EBM, 2017 ) (08/2017) for the list of drugs targeting GPCRs and mapped back to their reported target of therapeutic action. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 19, 'content': 'From the 475 queried FDA-approved drugs, data were available for 279 drugs targeting 92 distinct GPCRs (not all FDA-approved drugs are prescribed in the UK due to alternativetreatments). Items are the number of times the drug appeared on a prescription form that month (dened by National Health ServiceDigital as A prescription item is a single supply of a medicine, dressing or appliance written on a prescription form). The actual cost is the estimated cost to the National Health Service, which is usually lower than Net Ingredient Cost (the basic price of a drug, i.e. the price listed in the Drug Tariff or price lists). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'a container allowance for each prescription item ( DataLab-EBM, 2017 ). Total National Health Service spending was aggregated over each month of 2016 and compared with the total GPCR-targeting drugs to calculate the share for the GPCR targeting drugs ( Figure 1 ). Indications were grouped according to the British National Formulary (BNF), which is a reference book containing the standard list of medicines prescribed in the UK and also includes information on indications, dosage and side effects. Estimation of economic burden The economic burden estimate was calculated using the following formula: estimated economic burden per drug =average NHS cost per drug per year x %individuals with a MV in a functional site of the respective drug targets where: dThe average National Health Service cost is the average yearly cost over a 4-year period (2013-2016) per GPCR targeting drug that is listed (n = 279). 2012 and 2017 have partial sales data and were not considered. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'd% Individuals is the percentage of affected individuals with a missense variant in a functional site of the respective drug target(s)(n = 2,504 individuals from 1000 Genomes Project genotype data as a representative for the UK population; this data includesnon-Caucasian populations as well) ( Table S5 ). dThe % of affected individuals was calculated using four different criteria by considering individuals who have a variation in (i) known functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), which is the most conservative, (ii) known functional sites in at leastone allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous), (iii) known or putative functional sites in both alleles (homozygous), and (iv) known or putative functional sites in at least one allele (i.e., homozygous and heterozygous), which is the least conservative. dKnown functional sites include ligand binding, effector binding, post-translational modication site, sodium binding site and micro-switches. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Putative functional site include those predicted to be deleterious based on SIFT or PolyPhen (see above). More specically, for each drug we collected the respective targets and computed economic burden using the following four criteria above: considering (i) % individuals with homozygous alleles in known functional sites, (ii) % individuals with at least one variant allele in a known functional site, (iii) % individuals with homozygous alleles in known or putative functional sites and (iv)% individuals with at least one variant allele in a known or putative functional sites. For these estimates, we have incorporated the following considerations (below). The economic burden estimates will vary if one scales/factors these variables differently: 1. We have considered that each prescription (National Health Service data) is made for a unique individual, due to patient an- onymity. Furthermore, information about the dose per prescription, and how this has been altered based on patient response isnot explicitly modeled. 2. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'The effect of known and putative site polymorphisms as well as homozygous/heterozygous conditions are all treated the same way. One could also obtain estimates by weighing these variables differently on a case-by-case basis for each receptor/drug. 3. The focus has been prescription only from GPs. There might be signicant additions to the economic burden if one also con- siders hospital prescriptions. 4. We used the data from 1000 Genomes Project as representative of the UK population, which may vary depending on the receptor. 5. We have not explicitly modeled the age, gender, nature of illness (chronic v/s short-term) and mutations in non-coding regions, which may affect expression level of drug targets. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Interaction interface, functional, and structural site assignment Post-translational modication sites We obtained publicly available experimental data on post-translational modication sites for the GPCR drug targets (includingUbiquitylation, Phosphorylation, Palmitoylation, Hydroxylation, N/O-linked Glycosylation, Sulfation, Prenylation, ADP-ribosylation, Methylation, Sumoylation, Acetylation, Disulde bond and S-Nitrosylation) from dbPTM ( Huang et al., 2016 ). Additionally, all post- translational modication sites from PhosphoSitePlus (03/2017) from low-throughput experimental techniques, proteomic massspectrometry and shotgun proteomic experiments were collected and combined with the dbPTM dataset ( Hornbeck et al., 2015 ) (Table S4 ). Each post-translational modication site was cross-validated for identical amino acids in both dbPTM and its correspond- ing GPCRdb wild-type amino acid. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 20, 'content': 'For each receptor, we then obtained the post-translational modication sites with reported missense variation.Generic transmembrane ligand-interacting sites Ligand interaction sites were extracted from all 196 available receptor-ligand crystal structure complexes featuring 43 unique GPCR ligand-receptor complexes from Chordate organisms and higher (excluding organisms such as Herpesvirus 5 andTodarodes Cell172, 4154.e1e8, January 11, 2018 e5', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'pacicus ). The union of ligand-interacting positions were aggregated for each of the 42 unique crystallized receptors including aromatic, polar, and hydrophobic interactions within 4.5 A of the co-crystallized ligand ( Pandy-Szekeres et al., 2017; Munk et al., 2016b ). This led to a total set of 457 ligand-binding residues. Ligand binding site denition for receptors without structural information have been inferred from the receptor family level (based on NC-IUPHAR receptor family nomenclature obtained from GPCRdb) forwhich structural information was available (e.g., dopamine D 5receptor ligand-binding site is inherited from dopamine D 3receptor). To infer the ligand binding site from the crystallized receptor, we used only positions that have a generic numbering in the GPCRdb numbering scheme ( Isberg et al., 2015 ), which excludes ligand-interacting positions for most of the loops (three ECL2 positions, including 34x52 at the top of the 7TM ligand cavity, are included). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'For ortholog receptors (e.g., mouse, rat, bovine), we inferredgeneric positions only if the corresponding human residue is identical to the ortholog receptor. This allowed ligand-binding pocket characterization for 24 families and a total of 139 receptors. We provide annotation as to whether a position is a known ligand-binding site (LB) from a crystallized structure or an inferred one from a related structure of the same receptor family in Table S4 . Arrestin binding interface All available GPCR-arrestin complexes (PDB: 4ZWJ, PDB: 4PXF, PDB: 5DGY, all are Class A rhodopsin structures) were retrieved from the PDB and visualized using PyMol. The inter GPCR-arrestin residue contact network (RCN) for these structures was computedusing Arpeggio ( Jubb et al., 2017 ) with the maximum range of interaction set to 4.5 A . The union of all interacting residue positions was taken and corresponding residues (with same GPCRdb numbers) were retrieved from the GPCRdb WebServices. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'This led to the identication of 29 arrestin contacting positions that were used for the effector interaction site analysis. Arrestin residue positionswere applied to other classes by their corresponding generic position (see Use of common residue numbering systems to compare GPCR positions ). G protein binding interface The inter GPCR-G protein residue contact network was generated as described for arrestin. For the class A interface, the b2AR-Gs (PDB: 3SN6), A 2A-Gs mini(PDB: 5G53) and Rhodopsin-Gt-C-peptide (PDB: 3DQB, PDB: 3PQR, PDB: 4A4M) were used. This led to the identication of a total of 33 G-protein interacting positions on the receptor. The class B GPCR-G protein interface was calculated using the Calcitonin Receptor-Gs (PDB: 5UZ7) and the GLP-1-Gs (PDB: 5VAI) structures. For class C and class F receptors, the unionof both class A and B interface positions were considered as the G protein coupling positions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Microswitches Residues involved in mediating the conformational transition during activation (microswitches) were obtained from the literature(Trzaskowski et al., 2012 ). These include: D/E 3x49, K/Y7x43,R3x50,F5x47,Y5x58,E6x30,T6x34,W6x48,P6x50,N7x49,P7x50,Y7x53,I3x40. Additionally, we considered the P-I-F motif (P5x50,I3x40and F6x44) as an important motif for conformational rearrangements upon receptor activation ( Wacker et al., 2013 ). The positions 3x46, 6x37 and 7x53 were also considered as microswitches due to their importance in structural rearrangements ( Venkatakrishnan et al., 2016 ). Micro-switches were only considered for Class A receptors. Sodium ion pocket Residue positions (n = 15) of the sodium pocket were extracted from Katritch et al. ( Katritch et al., 2014 ) and comprised of N1x50, V1x53,L2x46,A2x47,A2x49,D2x50,S3x39,L3x43,F6x44,W6x48,N7x45,S7x46,N7x49,P7x50,Y7x53. The Na+pocket was only considered for Class A receptors. Structural site assignmentsSegments of structural sites were extracted using class-specic multiple sequence alignments. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Helix segments were assigned based on a residue independent generic numbering position as described in the GPCRdb (e.g., 1x50 - > TM1). Residues falling be- tween transmembrane regions were assigned to their respective loop region (extracellular and intracellular loops 1-3). Residuesbefore TM1 and after Helix 8 were assigned C-terminal and N-terminal, respectively. Pharmacological validation Selection criteria for in vitro variantsWe performed functional analysis and pharmacological validation of mutations in two GPCRs for the ligand binding (OPRM) and G protein binding (CCKAR). We selected the m-opioid receptor, due to its importance in analgesia, physical dependence and respi- ratory depression. Additionally, m-opioid receptor is targeted by nearly 40 FDA-approved drugs and is one of the highly polymorphic receptor. Specically, a structural analysis identied 5 variants of potentially damaging or altering effects upon drug binding. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'These include M153V 3x36, K235M5.39x40, K235N5.39x40, V238I5.42x43and V302I6x55. For the Cholecystokinin A receptor (CCKAR) we inves- tigated the effect of polymorphisms at the G protein binding interface, which is known to couple to several G proteins to produce itsphysiological effects ( Dufresne et al., 2006 ). We selected 7 variants at positions, which are potentially important to interact with the G protein, that were predicted to be deleterious in SIFT and PolyPhen and all mutations changed their residue properties (see Genetic variation data ). These include R139I 3x50, Q148E34x52, R150Q34x54, R150W34x54, E243K5x72, N304H6x26, V311E6x33. Experimental outcome of all selected variants is provided in Figure S5 . Genetic constructs Human wild-type and mutant receptors were synthesized and cloned into pcDNA3.1(+) by GenScript. pCMV5 plasmids encoding Gao, Gaq, and G as were gifts from Dr. Hiroshi Itoh (Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan). Plasmids encoding Venus 156-239-G g1, and Venus 1-155-G g2 were gifts from Dr. Nevin A. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Lambert (Augusta University, USA) ( Hollins et al., 2009 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'masGRK3ct-Nluc construct were generated as reported previously ( Masuho et al., 2015a ). PTX-S1 in mammalian expression vector was kindly provided by Dr. Eitan Reuveny (Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel) ( Raveh et al., 2010 ). Transient transfection We coated 6-cm culture dishes during incubation for 10 min at 37/C14C with 2.5 mL of Matrigel solution (approximately 10 mg/mL growth factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences) in culture medium). Cells were seeded into the 6-cm dishes containing Matrigel solution at a density of 4 3106cells/dish. After 4 hr, expression constructs (total 10 mg/dish) were transfected into the cells using PLUS (10ml/dish) and Lipofectamine LTX (12 ml/dish) reagents. Venus 156-239-G g1 (0.42 mg), Venus 1-155-G g2 (0.42 mg), and masGRK3ct-Nluc (0.42 mg) was transfected with different amount of G aand receptor constructs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'm-opioid receptor (2.52 mg), cholecystoninin A receptor (2.52 mg), G aoA (0.42 mg), G aq (0.84 mg), G as (2.52 mg), or G a13 (1.68 mg) was used. Empty vector pcDNA3.1(+) was used to normalize the total amount of transfected plasmid DNA. PTX-S1 (0.42 mg) was transfected with G aq, Gas, and G a13 to inhibit possible coupling to endogenous G abelonging to Gi/o subfamily. BRET assay for monitoring G protein activity BRET experiments were performed as previously reported with slight modications ( Masuho et al., 2015a, 2015b ). Sixteen to twenty- four hours post-transfection, HEK293T/17 cells were washed once with BRET buffer (PBS containing 0.5 mM MgCl 2and 0.1% glucose) and detached by pipetting with BRET buffer gently. Cells were harvested with centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min and resus- pended in BRET buffer. Approximately 50,000 to 100,000 cells per well were distributed in 96-well at-bottomed white microplates (Greiner Bio-One). The Nluc substrate, furimazine, were purchased from Promega and used according to the manufacturers instruc-tion. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'BRET measurements were performed using a microplate reader (POLARstar Omega or PHERAstar FSX, BMG Labtech) equip- ped with two emission photomultiplier tubes. All measurements were performed at room temperature. The BRET signal is determined by calculating the ratio of the light emitted by Venus-G b1g2 (535 nm with a 30-nm band path width) over the light emitted by masGRK3ct-Nluc (475 nm with a 30-nm band path width). The average baseline value recorded before agonist stimulation was sub-tracted from BRET signal values, and the resulting difference ( DBRET ratio) was plotted as traces. The transiently transfected cells were stimulated by endomorphin-1 (100 mM), morphine (100 mM), buprenorphine (10 mM), naloxone (100 mM) for m-opioid receptor or caerulein (30 mM) for CCKAR at 5 s. No agonist-induced activation of G proteins was detected from the negative control that omitted CCKAR. Each trace represents the mean of the responses measured in three or six wells. The maximal value recorded upon agonist stimulation was reported as R Max. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'The activation rate constants ( kON) were obtained by tting a single exponential curve to the traces with Clampt ver. 10.3 software (Molecular Devices). QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Pharmacological validation Statistical analysis to analyze the experimental data was performed with GraphPad Prism 6. Statistical parameters are reported in Figure Legends. All graphs pertaining to the experimental data were made with SigmaPlot 12.5. ESTIMATION OF STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE Enrichment of receptors with allele-specic expression Enrichment of GPCRs among genes with monoallelic expression was assessed with permutation tests by performing 100,000 randomizations. In each randomization, each GPCR was replaced with a random gene and the number of such randomly obtained genes that overlapped with genes with monoallelic expression was noted. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'From the random distribution, we computed the Z-score,which captures the distance of the actual number of observations (e.g., GPCRs with monoallelic expression) to the mean of randomexpectation in terms of the number of standard deviations. We estimated p value as the ratio of the number of simulations where the random observations were greater than or equal to the number of actually observed values to the total number of randomizations (100,000). Enrichment of MVs in known functional site To assess for enrichment of MVs affecting known functional sites, we obtained a list of random sites with similar number of sites withMV for all GPCRs and then counted the number of random sites that overlapped with known functional sites. We performed 100,000 such randomizations to obtain a distribution of random expectations. Z-score and p values were estimated as described above. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Statistical signicance for overlap between known and putative functional sites For assessing whether the overlap between known and putative functional sites (deciphered from SIFT and PolyPhen predictions) was signicantly higher than expected by chance, we randomly replaced each known functional site with a random site with amissense mutation in GPCRs and noted how many of these random mutant sites overlapped with the putative functional sites.We performed 100,000 such randomizations and obtained a distribution of expected overlap by chance. Z-score and p values were estimated as described above. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Statistical signicance for putative functional sites in different structural segments We estimated statistical signicance of differences in the distribution of putative functional sites and uncharacterized sites in different structural segments of GPCRs using the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test ( Figures S4 C;absolute counts andS4D;normalized for segment length ). DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY Data and code availability All relevant data are integrated into the web resource in GPCRdb ( Pandy-Szekeres et al., 2017 )(www.gpcrdb.org ) and can also be obtained from GitHub ( https://github.com/protwis/gpcrdb_data ). All data that support the ndings of this study have been provided asTables S1 ,S2,S3,S4,S5,S6, and S7as were deposited in Mendeley Data ( https://doi.org/10.17632/pr5v9t8z36.1 ). The open-source code can be obtained from GitHub ( https://github.com/protwis/protwis ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 23, 'content': 'In-house written scripts can be obtained from GitHub ( https://github.com/AlexanderHauser/GPCR-Pharmacogenomics ). For specic data/script requests please contact the lead contact. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES Missense variation mapping of specic receptors To analyze and characterize the extent of genetic variation, we incorporated all missense variations and functional annotations into the framework of the GPCRdb ( http://www.gpcrdb.org/ ) that allows researchers to map all missense variants for a selected receptor, using NC-IUPHAR receptor nomenclature, onto a snakelike diagram and helix-boxplot of the selected receptor residue topologies.Further, information regarding amino acid substitution, allele counts, allele frequencies, functional annotations, SIFT/PolyPhen scores and heterozygosity for each individual position is provided ( www.gpcrdb.org/mutational_landscape/ ). A statistic page is presented for an overview of genetic variation in GPCR drug targets ( www.gpcrdb.org/mutational_landscape/statistics ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 23, 'content': 'Possible economic impact of drug target variability can be analyzed and estimated for individual drugs and different groups of drugs via http://www.gpcrdb.org/mutational_landscape/economicburden . The National Health Service spending on each drug can be obtained from the drug-receptor pairing page, which includes specic information of the drug such as indication, target family, targetcategory (primary/secondary), status, drug type, mechanism of action and references ( www.gpcrdb.org/drugs/drugbrowser ). The natural variation dataset can be downloaded in full, accessed via an extensive API ( http://gpcrdb.org/services/reference/ ), or searched and browsed via a web interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Supplemental Figures (legend on next page)', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 25, 'content': 'Figure S1. Frequency of Genetic Variants in GPCR Drug Targets, Related to Figure 3 (A) The allele frequency spectrum (ExAC data) of the 108 GPCR targets of approved drugs shows that most genetic variants are rare (single observations or allele frequency %0.01%). Common variants (> 0.01%) exist for 358 sites. The coloring shows missense variations with an amino acid property change (changed) and missense variations, where the mutant amino acid substitution is within the same class of amino acid properties (similar).(B) To assess the most polymorphic GPCR drug targets ( rows ) across different categories including for MVs, LoFs and CNVs, Z-scores were calculated within categories ( columns ) and grouped by hierarchical clustering. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 26, 'content': '(legend on next page)', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 27, 'content': 'Figure S2. Loss-of-Function and Copy-Number Variations in GPCR Drug Target, Related to Figure 3 (AC) Distribution of human GPCRs by the number of FDA approved drugs that target them ( y axis, logarithmic scale ) and (A) the number of missense variants (x axis ) along with the fraction of MVs by receptor length (red color scale), (B) the number of loss of function variants ( x axis ) along with a conservative estimate of the minimum population frequency (blue color scale) and (C) the number of observed deletions ( x axis ) and duplications (purple color scale). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 28, 'content': 'Figure S3. All Available X-Ray Crystal Structures of GPCRs in Complex with FDA-Approved Drugs, Related to Figure 4 FDA approved drugs bound to their respective receptors (n = 15) are shown in green. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 29, 'content': 'Figure S4. Missense Variants in Post-translational Modication Sites and Structural Segments, Related to Figure 4 (A) Missense variants were mapped onto experimentally veried post-translational modication sites of GPCR drug targets (n = 846). Number of missen se variants per post-translational modication site type.(B) Structural segments were assigned for each receptor. Each segment was then aggregated into higher-order groups: C terminus, extracellular loop s, transmembrane region, intracellular loops, helix 8 and N terminus ( top). Cartoon representation of the b 2AR (PDB: 2RH1). (C) Missense variants were projected onto each structural segment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 29, 'content': 'Variants that are predicted to have a functional impact map (green) signicantly more often into the transmembrane region and loops (Wilcoxon rank sum test; EC-Loops: p < 8.0x10/C07, IC-Loops: p < 1.6x10/C03, TM: p < 2.2x10/C016) variants of unknown functional impact (gray).(D) Missense variants were projected onto each structural segment and normalized by segment length. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 30, 'content': '(legend on next page)', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 31, 'content': 'Figure S5. Effects of Mutations on RMaxandkONform-Opioid Receptor and CCKAR and Allele-Specic Expression of GPCR Drug Targets, Related to Figure 5 (A) Chemical structures of opioid receptor ligands. (B) The bar graphs quantitate the relative RMaxand kONofm-opioid receptor mutants to m-opioid receptor wild-type. (C) Chemical structure of Cholecystokinin receptor ligand caerulein.(D) The bar graphs quantitate the relative R Maxand kONof CCKAR mutants to CCKAR wild-type. For both panels, results are expressed as the mean SEM. One- way ANOVA with Dunnett post hoc multiple comparison test relative to wild type receptor, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, n = 3 independent experi ments. (E) Enrichment of GPCR drug targets among genes with mono-allelic expression. The Venn diagram shows the overlap between GPCR drug targets and thegenes with allelic expression data. Enrichment was tested with permutation tests by performing 100,000 iterations. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 31, 'content': 'The random expectation (gray hi stogram) and the actual observation (green arrow) of GPCRs with mono-allelic expression are shown on the right.', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 32, 'content': '(legend on next page)', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 33, 'content': 'Figure S6. Resource and Tools for the Analysis of Variation Data of GPCR Drug Targets within GPCRdb, Related to Figure 6 Datasets for natural genetic variations comprising of 60,706 individuals have been integrated into the GPCRdb. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 33, 'content': '(A) Sortable variant table is provided for every receptor with more detailed information on the type and nature of each amino acid substitution, infor mation about allele counts and frequency, predicted functional impact scores (SIFT and PolyPhen) and functional site annotation.(B) Genetic variation density (red intensity levels) on a GPCR classication tree (item statistics).(C) Data points can be visualized for every selected non-olfactory GPCR (missense variants in red shown for adrb2_human) on a snake-like diagram ( top) or a helix plot ( bottom ) with additional information shown on mouse-over (allele count, allele frequency, amino acid change, number of homozygotes, predicted effects by SIFT and PolyPhen).(D) Missense variants can also be visualized on a consensus snake-like diagram for single families or ligand-types of GPCRs (gradient red for all Clas s A peptide angiotensin receptors). Each position then gives the number of observed mutations and the list of observed amino acid changes.(E) National Health Service spending data from 2011 to 2017 for 279 FDA-approved drugs. This is shown for Buprenorphine. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Pharmacogenomics of GPCR Drug Targets', 'page': 34, 'content': 'Figure S7. Possible Economic Burden Due to Loss-of-Function and Copy-Number Variation Observed for GPCR Drug Targets, Related to Figure 6 (AC) For each FDA-approved drug, a pot of the number of prescribed items by the National Health Service each month ( y axis, logarithmic scale in thousands ) against (B) the percentage of individuals with loss of function mutations and (C) maximum number of copy number variations in its therapeutic GPCR tar get is shown. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Articles https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41594-021-00674-71Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. 2Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology,  Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Institute for Research in Immunology  and Cancer, Universit de Montral, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 4Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge,  UK. 5Centre of Membrane Proteins and Receptors (COMPARE), University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. 6Division of Physiology, Pharmacology  & Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. 7Department of Structural Biology and Center for Data Driven  Discovery, St. Jude Childrens Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 8Present address: Data T ools Department, Novozymes A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.  9These authors contributed equally: Alexander S. Hauser, Albert J. Kooistra. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'e-mail: david.gloriam@sund.ku.dkGPCRs are natures primary transmembrane transducers for  carrying signals from extracellular ligands to intracellular effectors, to regulate numerous physiological processes.  The most widely used nomenclature designates GPCR classes AF and was introduced in the first version of the GPCR database, GPCRdb 1, on the basis of conserved sequence fingerprints2,3. The  human GPCRs have also been classified on the basis of phyloge - netic analysis into families (classes): glutamate (C), rhodopsin (A), adhesion (B2), Frizzled (F), secretin (B1) 4 and Taste 2 (T, reclassi - fied as a separate family in ref. 5). The human GPCRs are activated  from different endogenous ligand-binding sites in the transmem - brane (class A) or extracellular domain (class C) or both (classes B and F), and have very low sequence similarity (cross-class pairs, mean 23%). This raises the question as to what extent the GPCR  superfamily utilizes universal or unique activation mechanisms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': ' Considering that GPCRs mediate the actions of two-thirds of endogenous hormones and neurotransmitters 6, and over one-third  of drugs79, mapping their activation mechanisms is important to  understand human physiology, disease etiology and for rational drug design. Comparisons of inactive and active structures of class A GPCRs  have uncovered common activation mechanisms within the seven transmembrane helices (7TM), which have been shown to tilt, rotate, elongate or switch residue side chain rotamers to create  contact networks that stabilize the receptors in a specific state 1013.  These contacts converge near the G-protein site14 and are conserved  regardless of the subtypes of intracellular effector11. Site-directed  mutagenesis of contact residues has revealed differences in phar - macological responses, including constitutive activity11 and signal - ing bias15, and naturally occurring mutations have been associated  with disease or change of response11,16,17. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'However, the classes B, C  and F are largely unexplored with respect to common activation  mechanisms, and until now such studies have not been possible due  to a lack of structures across the activation states. In this work, we conducted a comprehensive comparative struc - tural analysis of inactive/active-state structures in each GPCR class by analyzing all 488 available structures from different GPCR classes (Fig. 1). We present a GPCR superfamily-wide molecular mecha - nistic map of activation, and link determinants to ligand-binding, G-protein coupling, transduction and allosteric sites. This can serve as a roadmap to assess the activation of any GPCR and to under - stand how common or distinct determinants can fine-tune physio - logical signaling responses and contribute to a desired drug efficacy. Results Dataset and methods for comparative structure analysis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'To pres - ent the best maps possible to date, we made a comprehensive anno - tation of all available class A, B1, C and F GPCR structures (the 406 class A GPCR structures are twice as many as in any previous report 11). Stringent quality filters were applied to these structures to  select the representative inactive/active-state structures from each class (Methods and Supplementary Data 1). Out of 68 templates  used, 45 have a resolution of 3.0  or better. It should be noted that  in lower resolution structures (for example, above 3.0 ) it is mainly  backbone movements that can be discerned, while residue contacts  can only be under-represented (that is, not lead to false-positive  contacts). For classes A and B1, 22 out of 58 and 5 out of 5 recep - tor families (based on a shared endogenous ligand), respectively,  have a structural template. This diversity ensures that any artifacts observed in a specific position or structure will only have a marginal  effect on the overall frequency of movements and contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'We introduce a definition of state-specific contacts on the basis  of their relative frequency (%) in a given inactive/active-state struc - ture. Similarly to the scores calculated in ref. 11, this allows for the GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and  macro/microscales Alexander S. Hauser 1,9, Albert J. Kooistra 1,9, Christian Munk1,8, Franziska M. Heydenreich 2,3,4,  Dmitry B. Veprintsev5,6, Michel Bouvier 3, M. Madan Babu 7 and David E. Gloriam 1 Two-thirds of human hormones and one-third of clinical drugs activate ~350 G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) belonging  to four classes: A, B1, C and F. Whereas a model of activation has been described for class A, very little is known about the  activation of the other classes, which differ by being activated by endogenous ligands bound mainly or entirely extracellu- larly. Here we show that, although they use the same structural scaffold and share several helix macroswitches, the GPCR classes differ in their residue microswitch positions and contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 1, 'content': 'We present molecular mechanistic maps of activation for  each GPCR class and methods for contact analysis applicable for any functional determinants. This provides a superfamily  residue-level rationale for conformational selection and allosteric communication by ligands and G proteins, laying the founda-tion for receptor-function studies and drugs with the desired modality. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyidentification of many more determinants than requiring 100%  presence and absence, respectively, in opposite states. An example is the four inactive- and two active-state stabilizing contacts identi - fied in the landmark study comparing five class A GPCRs across the states 14 (in which only two and three active-state templates were G  protein- and agonist-bound, respectively). Importantly, the use of frequencies with (different) sets of inactive- and active-state struc - tures opens up not only the same, but also different receptors across the states, for analysis, since the same helix backbone movements and contacts can be mediated by different amino acids. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'This is criti - cal to the identification of a comparable number of residues with state-specific contacts (state-determinant residues) in classes C and F, for which the structural coverage is limited so far: five and three  receptors fulfill our cut-offs, representing 23% and 27% of all mem - bers of these relatively small classes, respectively. Furthermore, we  also apply residue-pair conservation cut-offs (Methods). Together, the combined contact frequencies and conservation cut-offs  address the class representativeness, allowing analyses across the    GPCR superfamily. GPCR activation engages all TMs with unique contact patterns.  To investigate how the seven transmembrane helices TM17 rear - range upon activation, we compared the 13 GPCRs for which both  an inactive- and active-state structure are available (all active tem - plates are in the G-protein-bound state, Supplementary Table 1). We find that all transmembrane helices rearrange at least one end by >1.0  in most receptors, thus demonstrating unappreciated struc - tural dynamics (Fig. 2, with individual receptor plots in Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Notably, in class B1, all seven transmembrane helices relocate their extracellular ends where the N-terminal  domain restricts the conformation of the 7TM before activation 18.  Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), which is the best template hav - ing a full-length inactive structure18, has a 2.510- relocation of  TM17 in this region; all of which also move in corticotropin releas - ing factor type 1 (CRF1). Furthermore, we analyzed the conforma - tional change of each class at the membrane mid, extracellular end  and cytosolic end. Here the rearrangements total 6, 12 and 28 ,  respectively, and involve on average 1.7, 4.4 and 4.5 transmembrane  helices per receptor. This presents a quantitated characterization of  the magnitude and abundance of helix rearrangements at the mid, extracellular and cytosolic regions of the transmembrane domain. It supports opposite functional roles in: (1) maintaining a stable GPCR fold, (2) adapting to ligands of diverse size or (3) coupling to the much larger G proteins, respectively. This connects struc - ture and function and reveals a wide engagement of the GPCR fold across its helices and domains. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'We next investigated how the rearrangements of the trans - membrane helix bundle change the residue contact networks between receptor segments by comparing all 42 inactive-state and 27 active-state representative structures (all active templates are  G-protein bound, Supplementary Table 1). We find that, in addition  to TM17, state-specific contacts are also formed to helix 8 (H8) in classes A and F, intracellular loop 1 (ICL1) in classes A and C and extracellular loop 2 (ECL2) in classes C and F (Figs. 3 and 4). Classes  A, C and F have two-thirds to three-quarters of inactivating con - tacts (75%, 67% and 71%, respectively). Class B1 has fewer (39%)  inactivating contacts, but this figure is close to half (namely, 48%) when considering only the contacts spanning different segments  (excluding four intrahelical contacts). Sequence conservation anal - ysis of each GPCR class shows that most residue-residue contacts  can be formed in at least 30% of receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'These findings provide a structural rationale of why most receptors have no or little activ - ity without prior stimulation by an agonist. Furthermore, it dem - onstrates that most TM helices can switch from mainly inactive- to active-state contacts (Fig. 3b). Notably, this rewiring leads to mark - edly different patterns of segment contacts across GPCR classes, which combine several unique and some common contacts (below), as even high-homology receptors sharing endogenous ligands, such  as the A 1 and A2A adenosine or muscarinic acetylcholine M1 and M2  receptors, display unique helix movements (Fig. 2). The common movements and contacts (see below) provide a  structural rationale for shared overall functions throughout the  GPCR superfamily: for example, ligand-dependent activation, sig - nal transduction across the cell membrane and G-protein coupling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'These are complemented by a larger number of unique structural features that allow the receptors to be diversified with respect to the  specific ligand scaffold, G-protein profile and functional response  kinetics and efficacy. TM6 universal helix macroswitch differs mechanistically. We  next investigated single helix rearrangements across 13 receptor  inactive/active-state structure pairs. We find that outward move - ment and rotation of TM6 on the cytosolic sideopening for G-protein couplingis a universal feature of activation through - out the GPCR superfamily (Fig. 2a), as first suggested for class A19.  Intracellular TM6 movement is observed in all 13 receptors investi - gated and is largest in classes A (713 ), B1 (1419 ) and F (7 ),  where it is combined with a substantial average rotation: 38, 39 and 38, respectively. The extracellular end of TM6 in these classes also  moves by on average 2.0, 3.4 and 6.2 , respectively. The movement  of TM6 gives it the largest (B1 and F) or second largest (A) number  of contacts stabilizing an inactive or active state in these classes (Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': '3); however, TM6 also displays large mechanistic differences across  classes. Class B1 has a unique unwinding of the extracellular-facing  half of TM6 in all three activated receptors 2022. This corroborates a  recent study comparing the class B1 glucagon and class A 2 recep - tors, linking the weaker ability of the agonist to induce the outward movement of cytoplasmic TM6 to a slower G-protein activation 21.  Furthermore, in class C, TM6 uniquely has no extracellular move - ment and only a small cytosolic movement (2.8 ) and rotation  (13). Consequently, TM6 has only two state-specific contacts and stabilizes only the inactive state, while TM1, TM3 and TM5 have  35 contacts across both states (Fig. 3b). The smaller role of TM6  in activation throughout the class is supported by markedly lower conservation of its proline, 55% compared to 93100% in the other classes AC, while the importance of TM7 is emphasized by a 95%  conserved proline (Fig. 2b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'The noncanonical small TM6 tilt, with  3State stabilizers in functional residue positions  ligand/G-protein binding or signal transducingResidue positions2 Contact networks between helices or residuesResidue networksRepresentative structure for GPCR and stateFrom macro-to micro switches 1 Transmembrane helix tilt and rotationHelix bundleInactive/active GPCR structures  from all major human classes+Ligand and G-protein site s and activity-altering mutationsGPCRdb Activation engages all transmembrane helices, helix 8 and loops TM6 and TM3 are universal helix switches 17 residue switches are pivotal for changing the state Web resource for comparative structure analysis allows uncovering of determinantsR3x505x58T 2x39Y ICL1 ECL1 ICL2 ECL2 ICL3 ECL3 Fig. 1 | Analysis pipeline for elucidation of GPCR activation mechanisms.  Pipeline for analysis of universal and distinct activation of macro/microswitches spanning helix repacking to side chain rotation and the connection to ligand-binding, G-protein coupling and signal transduction sites (Methods). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 2, 'content': 'NAtuRE StRuC tuRAl & MolECulAR BioloG y | VOL 28 | NOVEMBER 2021 | 879888 | www.nature.com/nsmb 880', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGya less conserved kink and atypical contacts to the adjacent TM5  and TM7, is associated with a different overall mechanism. This is because class C GPCRs work as an asymmetric homo- or heterodi - mer and the activated transmembrane domain is mainly character - ized by dimer reorientation rather than rearrangements within the receptor monomers, of which only one couples to a G protein. These findings show that the GPCR activation machinery uti - lizes TM6 as a universal switch in each class, although undergo - ing different rearrangements, such as helix toggling, rotation and/or unwinding. Such commonality across classes in the activation mechanism at the level of transmembrane helices, but diversity and  nuances of the type of movements, provides an important structural  rationale for drug discovery and in the future design of experiments to elucidate the effects of mutations, ligand efficacy and G-protein selectivity 23 mechanisms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': 'TM5 is a common switch and TM3 is a hub for stabilization.  TM5, like TM6, can be considered a universal switch for GPCR  activation, as it moves on the intracellular side in all four classes (with, on average, A: 2.1, B1: 2.4, C: 2.0 and F: 1.8 ) (Fig. 2b and  Extended Data Fig. 2). TM7 also moves in all classes except class  C, either on the cytosolic side (all class A receptors), the extracel - lular side (for example, 10- movement and 100 rotation in GLP-1, the class B1 receptor with full-length templates) or on both sides  (class F). These movements are possible due to several conserved  proline and glycine residues that induce helix plasticity (Fig. 2b).  Class A GPCRs have triple proline kinks in TM57, which allow  TM5 and TM7 to close in on and stabilize TM6. Class B1 TM6 unwinding is facilitated by both a proline kink (P647) and a gly - cine (G650). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Class B1 GPCRs also feature a proline kink (P542) near the extracellular end of TM5, which moves 3.3  in GLP-1, and  a glycine kink (G750) in TM7. Class F combines the TM6 switch  with movements of cytosolic TM5 (with one Pro and two Gly resi - dues) and TM7 on both sides. This demonstrates that TM6 does  not act on its own but is supported by TM5 and TM7 in a concerted movement and that the determinants of this plasticity are conserved  throughout the classes. We find that TM3 has the largest number of state-specific con - tacts to other receptor segments in each GPCR class (35, Fig. 3).  This reveals that TM3, previously shown to be a stabilization hub maintaining the common transmembrane fold 24, also plays a central  role in stabilization of distinct states across the GPCR superfamily. Furthermore, whereas an early report based on two class A GPCRs  suggested an activation mechanism involving an upward movement  of TM3 (ref. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': ' 25), our analysis of TM helix movements across classes  instead points to rotation as the main mechanism (Extended Data  a Extracellular Intracellular1 B1A CF2 B1A CF3 B1A CF 4 B1A CF 5 B1A CF 6 B1A CF7 B1A CFTM17 Mid 1 B1A CF2 B1A CF 3 B1A CF4 B1A CF 5 B1A CF 6 B1A CF7 B1A CFTM17 Active3 B1A CF 1 B1A CF2 B1A CF4 B1A CF 5 B1A CF 6 B1A CF7 B1A CFTM17 InactivecTM3 Active Inactiveb A B1 C FTM5 TM6 TM7 P5x50 79%P6x50 99% P7x50 94%38 P5x42 100% P6x55 55% P7x50 95% P5x50 100% G6x34 100%G7x49 100%G6x50 100% P6x47 93%G7x50 100% G5x58 100% G5x65 100%P6x43 91%TM1 TM2 TM3 TM4 TM5 TM6 TM7 4.24 .9 1.2 A1 A2A 1.45 .0 5.7 M1 1.05 .5 5.4 M2A 3.71 .0 1.31 .2 1.62 .1 CB2 1.51 .2 8.53 .4 1.2 CXCR2 2.32 .4 1.01 .8 2.0 2.11 .6 1.41 .1 3.24 .2 2.2 CRF1 1.32 .2 1.43 .4 Glucagon B1 3.52 .5 3.44 .9 3.32 .7 9.9 GLP-1 1.3 GABAB2 C 6.22 .1 SMOF 2212 23 3 Class count TM1 TM2 TM3 TM4 TM5 TM6 TM7 1.0 2.01 .8 1.7 1.12 .5 A 1.8 1.0 2.71 .8 1.3 1.52 .5 1.7 1.43 .5 1.81 .5 4.1 B1 3.9 1.5 C 2.3 F 12 TM1 TM2 TM3 TM4 TM5 TM6 TM7 2.52 .2 8.74 .6 1.61 .3 4.1 15.43 .6 1.21 .6 1.81 .1 6.85 .1 1.02 .6 1.58 .7 2.4 A 3.22 .4 1.5 12.83 .6 1.16 .4 10.93 .9 1.23 .3 6.54 .3 3.71 .1 3.59 .6 3.1 1.22 .7 2.81 .7 19.42 .4 1.5', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': ' 25), our analysis of TM helix movements across classes  instead points to rotation as the main mechanism (Extended Data  a Extracellular Intracellular1 B1A CF2 B1A CF3 B1A CF 4 B1A CF 5 B1A CF4 .4 14.4 B1 1.43 .1 2.91 .0 15.9 2.92 .0 2.8 C 1.11 .8 7.01 .5 F 1222 44 239 13 38/uni03B22 A1 A2A M1 M2 CB2 CXCR2 CRF1 Glucagon GLP-1 GABAB2 SMO Class count/uni03B22 A1 A2A M1 M2 CB2 CXCR2 CRF1 Glucagon GLP-1 GABAB2 SMO Class count/uni03B22 Fig. 2 | t ransmembrane helix movement upon activation, and universal t M3 and t M6 helix macroswitches. a, Movements () over 1.0 at the  extracellular end, membrane mid (determined using ref. 43) and intracellular end of the transmembrane helices TM17 upon comparison of all available  receptor inactive- and active-state structure pairs (Supplementary T able 1). Red intensity denotes the number of classes with a consensus. b, Movement  and conserved hinges of TM6 and the adjacent TM5 and TM7. c, TM3 cytosolic tilt and overall rotation. b,c, GPCR class-representative inactive/ active receptor structure pairs: A:  2 (refs. 44,45), B1: GLP-1 (refs. 18,22), C: GABAB246 and F: Smoothened47,48 receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Proline and glycine residues that increase  helix plasticity are shown, along with their percentage conservation in the GPCR class. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyFig. 1). In 11 out of 13 of the investigated receptor pairs (all except  A2A and CRF1), TM3 rotates at either the cytosolic (most frequent  for class A, average 16) or extracellular end (classes B1, C and F, average 19, 12 and 17, respectively), while no receptor rotates at  both ends or at the membrane mid (Extended Data Figs. 1 and 2).  Lateral movement of TM3 contributes to a different extent across classes, being mainly at: both ends (B1), the cytosolic end (C), either end (a minority of receptors in A) or no movement (F). In contrast,  TM4, which is peripherally located in the transmembrane helix  bundle, has few or no contacts (class A:1, B1:0, C:3 and F:0). This shows that the abundant helix packing has not immobilized TM3. Instead, it contributes to GPCR activation in several places through an array of mainly local rotations or movements. Residue microswitches expand the class A activation model. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': ' To investigate state determinants at the residue microswitch level, we indexed topologically corresponding receptor positions with  generic residue numbers 26 and classified them into inactivators ,  activators and switches on the basis of frequent contacts in inac - tive, active and both states, respectively. We uncovered a compa - rable number of state determinants across classes (Fig. 4a). Across  the classes, these span 94 distinct residue positions, 67 inactivators, 37 activators and only 11 switches (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Table  2). Only nine switches undergo side chain rotamer shifts, revealing  that the rotamer microswitchesdescribed as major state determi - nants for class A GPCRs12,13play a small role in the GPCR super - family. Importantly, many determinant positions contain the same highly conserved amino acid (Fig. 4a), and the amino acid pairs observed for each contact are conserved in at least 40% of all recep - tors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Notably, this includes the reference positions for generic resi - due numbers (index 50) in five out of seven TMs, H8 and ICL1, all  major previously known class A state determinants11,12 and a class  F switch, 632 (refs. 27,28) (sequence motifs and microswitches with  magenta border in Fig. 4a). This demonstrates that our approach  (Discussion) identifies both known and new conserved determi - nants, even where the structural coverage is limited, including the active state of classes C and F. In class A, W6 48, earlier suggested to be a rotamer toggle  switch 12, does not itself undergo a rotamer shift but a helix rota - tional shift (of 10) and is approached by I3 40, which has both  types of rotation. This provides an alternative to a reported PIF motif 2931, which is here found to consist most frequently of PIW  (P5 50 being the third residue). The PIF motif s last residue,  F644, rather acts as a switch in a new triplet LLF located in the  same helices: TM3, TM5 and TM6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The two residues D2 50 and  N7 49, which coordinate a sodium ion32, are here found to have a  direct interaction that stabilizes the inactive state. Notably, N7 49  contacts P7 50, uncovering a concerted stabilization across the  sodium ion site and TM7 helix kink around the NPxxY motif. The final residue of the NPxxY motif, a Y7 53 switch 1113, has three  inactivating and two activating state-specific contacts with over 40% frequency difference, including to another switch: I3 46. The  TM3 DRY motif includes an intrahelical ionic lock from D3 49 to R3 50, which, upon activation, swings to interact with the G  protein as well as the switch Y5 58 on TM5 (ref.  13). Of note, the  restraining of R3 50 is strengthened by contacts to TM2 and TM6  (A6 34)however, typically not to E6 30, which was part of the  first ionic lock reported in rhodopsin33 but less conserved (E: 25%  or D/E: 31% compared to D: 65% or D/E: 86% for position 4 49). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': ' On the intracellular side, H8 and ICL1 contain three and two deter - minants, respectively, including the novel switch F8 50 contacting  another new switch on TM7, A7 54. These findings corroborate  the findings of previous studies on class A1014. They also, together  with the concerted movement of TM57 and the role of TM3 as a state-stabilization hub (see above), substantially expand the activa - tion model of class A receptors. To further substantiate the importance of inactivating and acti - vating state determinants (collectively, predicted state-changing residue positions), we performed mutagenesis experiments and measured epinephrine-induced  2-adrenoceptor activation of Gs  and G15 using bioluminescence energy transfer (BRET)-based  biosensors. We mutated six predicted state-changing (contact fre - quency difference >80% across states) and six nonstate-changing residues to alanine. To isolate effects due to intrareceptor conforma - tional stabilization, these excluded residues interacting with ligands or G proteins in structure complexes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'We found that state-changing positions are more prone than nonstate-changing mutations to ala - nine mutation-induced potency reductions for Gs (mean log(EC50)  from wild type (WT) 1.07 versus 0.22 (EC50, half-maximum effec - tive concentration); Wilcoxon rank-sum test: P = 0.0193) and G15  (mean log(EC50) from WT 1.25 versus 0.25; Wilcoxon rank-sum  test: P = 0.0049) (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 2). In contrast,  the mutations did not have a statistically significant differential  effect on efficacy (Wilcoxon rank-sum test; Gs: P = 0.6991; G15:  P = 0.3095). Five out of six state-changing mutations cluster tightly  in the transduction pathway between the ligand and G-protein pockets, and this group of mutations more frequently form intra - helical receptor contacts, whereas several nonstate-changing  mutations instead face the membrane (Fig. 5b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'This confirms the correlation between state-specific structural residue-residue con - tacts and ligand-induced pharmacological receptor activity, and points to reduction in potency (not efficacy) and differential intra - helical contacts as underlying determinants. Class B1 state-determinant residues shared with class A. The  comparison of unique and common state determinants across the  GPCR superfamily shows that nearly half of the B1 determinants (16 out of 33) map to equivalent topological positions as in class A, compared to 10 for class F and 8 for class C (leftmost in Fig. 4b).  Furthermore, the classes B1 and A have four common switches (sec - ond to rightmost in Fig. 4b). Notably, this includes the two known  microswitches (A/B1 residue number): Y558/F554 and Y753/Y757 as well as the pair I346/E350 and F644/L649 (magenta  in Extended Data Fig. 3). We also find that the class A toggle switch  activator W648 is substituted by a conserved smaller aromatic residue Y653 in class B1(Extended Data Fig. 3). Together, these  Fig. 3 | GPCRs stabilize inactive and active states by rerouting contacts between t M17, H8, iCl1 and ECl2. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'a, State-specific residue-residue contacts  in each GPCR class visualized as lines within representative inactive/ active receptor structure pairs (same as in Fig. 2b,c ). Numbers indicate the total,  inactivating and activating contacts in each GPCR class. b, Contact networks between the seven GPCR transmembrane helices, TM17, and the first  intracellular (ICL1) and second extracellular (ECL2) loops (intrasegment contacts not shown). Line thickness represents the number of classes (top-most) or contact frequency differences between the inactive and active states. Line color indicates inactivating (blue) and activating (red) contacts. Receptor segments with a magenta border are switches, that is, having contacts across both states. Contacts are identified on the basis of a higher frequency (%) in inactive than in active-state receptors. a,b, The frequency difference threshold was set according to the structural coverage in each GPCR class (threshold: no. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 4, 'content': 'members, inactive/ active state templates): A: 40% (285, 33/14), B1: 67% (15, 3/10), C: 75% (22, 4/2) and F: 100% (11, 2/2). T o ensure that the identified determinants are applicable throughout each class, we also applied a sequence conservation cut-off requiring at least 30% of all its receptors to contain one of the amino acid pairs observed to form the given state-specific contact. Contact definitions are explained in the settings menu of the online Comparative structure analysis tool (https:/ /review.gpcrdb.org/structure_comparison/ comparative_analysis ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGycommonalities between classes B1 and A are indicative of partially  shared activation mechanisms. However, there are also markedly unique features in class B1.  Strikingly, 14 out of 33 of the state determinants in class B1 are located in TM6, which engages 10 additional determinants (mostly in TM5 and TM7) (Fig. 4) that move together with TM6 (Fig. 2).  The high concentration of state determinants in TM6, and packing  to adjacent helices, may provide a plausible structural rationale for a  32 contacts: 24 inactiv ating (75%) 8 activ ating (25%)Class A 23 contacts: 9 inactiv ating (39%) 14 activ ating (61%)Class B1 12 contacts: 8 inactiv ating (67%) 4 activ ating (33%)Class C 24 contacts: 17 inactiv ating (71%) 7 activ ating (29%)Class F Class B1 1 3111 1TM1 TM7TM6TM3TM2 TM5TM4 H8ICL2ECL1 ECL2 Class FClass A 211111 2 1 2 122 121 TM3TM1 TM7TM2 TM6 H8TM5ICL1TM4ICL2ECL1 ECL2State s witch1No. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 5, 'content': 'contacts (belo w) Inactiv ating contact Activ ating contactA, B1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyT 1x53W8x54L1x52Y3x33 M3x37I4x60 F5x461 Y2x51S3x39 Y2x39S 4x42A5x45F6x55 R6x32W7x55 T1x50I7x56L 3x48 L3x52F7x43 M 7x44C2x50A 3x38Y 6x51K7x41I1x36W2x58F 3x34A 4x54 W3x43 T3x47G 5x58 W3x50L5x62M6x30A3x53Y 45x51V 5x47 F3x29V 45x52Class F (n = 40) ECL2 TM5T M6 TM4 TM2T M3 TM1T M7 H8 Inactiv ators Activators 27 68%12 30%1 3%Switches Common and unique state deter minants across the human GPCR superf amily Switches (n = 11) 0000 000 0 0 040 1 42AB1 C FInactiv ators (n = 67) 0000 202 0 0 5211 20 214AB1 C FActiva tors (n = 37) 0001 101 0 0 026 10 313AB1 C Fb All state determ inants (n = 94) 0003 513 3 6 4911 22 189AB1 C FC6x47L7x40 N1x50S7x46 A 2x47L3x43L5x51 F 6x44W 6x48 P 5x50 I 3x46I 2x43 F 2x42I7x52V 1x53I 4x49F 3x41I3x40 Y7x53CWxP PIW (not PIF) NPxxYClass A (n = 41) Contact netw orksa Sodium ion siteLxxD D2x50N 7x49 P 7x50G 1x49 V6x41 A6x34M5x54 D 3x49 T 2x39A6x38 L 6x37V 6x40 Y5x58R3x50 TM3 DR Y /ionic lockFrequency diff erence in inactiv e/ac', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 6, 'content': 'tiv e state50%Inactiv ating Activ atingContacts: TxL >80% conser ved motif (class A)Conser vation: In class (%)Rotamer shift 7x53State sw itchSwitches: R8x51L 12x50E 8x49 R12x51N 2x40 T 2x37F8x50 A 7x54Class B1 (n = 33) Y1x43 L 7x42F6x56K7x37 Y6x53 G7x45 S6x41F3x36 Q3x37 E3x50 T6x42 L7x56L 2x53F 2x57 V6x44L6x48 L 1x61N2x47 L 3x54L 6x38H6x52L 7x44 F 5x54L6x49 L 6x45 L6x43I5x57I 5x47G 6x50I6x46I6x51 Y 7x57Q7x49 864202468Intra- cellularExtra - cellularTM5T M6 TM4 TM2T M3 TM1I CL1 TM7H 8 TM5T M6 TM4 TM2T M3 TM1T M7 RatioState determ inants Inactiv ators 10 30%17 52%6 18%Switches Inactiv ators Activators 28 68%5 12%8 20%Switches Inactiv ators Activators 16 76%8 38%0 0%SwitchesCountN 1x64T12x47 K3x50E6x35 S12x53 T3x51L5x57Class C (n = 21) TM5T M6 TM4 TM2T M3 TM1ICL1/ ECL2 TM7 D4x43K5x47Y5x46 N1x61F 7x48M1x51Y 2x50 A 1x54L2x43I4x42 I2x42A3x43N45x52445x52M5x36 Fig. 4 |  State-stabilizing contact maps and differences at the residue-level microswitches. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 6, 'content': 'a, Contact networks visualize the wiring of state determinants  from the extracellular (top) to intracellular (bottom) sides. Contact frequency differences between the inactive and active states are shown as varied line  thickness, and residue rotamers as rotation of the consensus amino acid in the analyzed structure and its generic residue number. T wo-way Venn diagrams depict the number and percentages of inactivator (blue), activator (red) and switch (magenta) state-determinant positions. Bar diagrams show their distribution across the TM helices, H8 and loops. b , Comparison of common and unique state-determinant positions across all investigated classes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyrecent report demonstrating a higher energy barrier for the forma - tion of the kinked and partially unwound TM6 in the class B1 glu - cagon receptor compared to the class A 2-adrenoceptor21. Another  unique feature in class B1 is two additional switches in TM7 (Q749  and L756). Class B1, like class A, has a large structural coverage  (10 out of 15 receptors) and contains several major drug targets7.  The map of state determinants in class B1 gives a better understand - ing of the basic receptor-activation mechanisms and presents a foundation for targeting determinant networks in structure-based design of new drugs that stabilize receptors in the desired state. No universal residue-level microswitch mechanism. Class C has  the fewest residue state-determinant microswitches and no activa - tion switch with high-frequency contacts in both states. This is in concordance with its smallest (by far) conformational change (Fig. 2). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Another characteristic of class C is that it has no determinants  00.51.01.52.000.51.01.52.0 020406080100120GsGs G15G15Potency Emax Predicted non-state-changing mutationsPredicted state-changing mutationsPotency reduction (log units from WT)Potency reduction (log units from WT) Percentage of EmaxPercentage of Emaxa b Extracellular IntracellularP = 0.0193  P = 0.6991  P = 0.0049 P = 0.3095  020406080100120 Fig. 5 | Mutations of predicted state-changing residue positions reduce potency. a, Effect upon alanine mutation of predicted state-changing and  nonstate-changing residues, respectively, on epinephrine-induced 2-adrenoceptor activation of Gs and G15 measured by BRET-based biosensors. Predicted  state-changing residues show a significantly higher reduction in potency (left), but not in efficacy (E, right), for both Gs and G15 relative to wild type. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 7, 'content': ' Statistical significance has been assessed by a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test (n=6 for each category, individual data points in Supplementary T able 2). Box-and-whiskers plots are presented with interquartile box bounds (25% and 75%); middle line represents the median; x represents the mean; whiskers extend to the minimum and maximum value. b, Structural mapping of predicted state-changing (orange) and nonstate-changing mutations (gray) on the inactive carazolol-bound inactive  2-adrenoceptor structure (PDB 2RH1)44. C are shown as spheres and C-C bonds are displayed as  sticks. Five out of six state-changing mutations cluster tightly in the transduction pathway between the ligand and G-protein pockets. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGythat form contacts within the same transmembrane helix, whereas  each of classes A, B1 and F has four such microswitches. This reflects that class C GPCRs uniquely bind the endogenous ligand  entirely in the N terminus and transduce signals across the mem - brane by dimers that reorient. In addition to the 7TM domain, class  C GPCRs have one determinant in ECL2 and two microswitches in ICL1 (as does class A). Class F has 40 residue microswitches, of  which one is in H8 (854) and two in ECL2 (Y4551 and V4552).  The two ECL2 positions follow a conserved cysteine C4550, which forms a covalent disulfide bridge, also to TM3, across the GPCR classes 34. Class F has the highest conservation of determinant  consensus amino acids (on average 82%) showing that most con - tacts identified in the three structural templates: FZD4, FZD7 and Smoothened, are probably shared by the remaining eight receptors. Class F has one switch, Y4551. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'By comparing all GPCR classes, we find that 60 out of 94 deter - minant positions are unique to one class, whereas 27 are found in two classes and 7 in three classes (Fig. 4b). The determinants common for at least two classes are even fewer when considering  their type: ten inactivators (maximum five in AF), five activators  (maximum two in AB1) and four switches (all between A and B1) (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 3). These findings demonstrate that  although they belong to the same superfamily, use the same struc - tural scaffold and share several macroswitches (helices), the GPCR classes differ in their microswitches (residues). This suggests that there is an ensemble of structural/mechanistic solutions that are  available for the GPCR superfamily during evolution and that dif - ferent receptor classes have explored. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'It also means that while think - ing about developing drugs with different modalitiesespecially  for classes C and Fone should aim to interact with or modulate class-specific state determinants and residue-level microswitches  rather than use the same microswitches as in class A. State determinants and functional interface sites. To obtain topo - logical and functional mapping of the state determinants, we mapped  their location in relation to ligand and G protein-interacting posi - tions from structures (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Data 2). We find that 2%, 10%, 10% and 30% of determinants in classes class A, C, F and B1, respectively, map to ligand-interacting positions in the  upper part of the transmembrane helix domain or ECL2 (the ortho - steric binding pocket in classes A, B1 and F). The single such deter - minant in class A is the helix rotation switch W648. Furthermore,  0%, 10%, 29% and 36% of determinants in classes class C, F, A and B1, respectively, map to G-protein-interacting positions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Together,  this shows that while most determinants are in the transduction  pathway between ligand and G-protein sites, except for in class B1, ligands and G proteins can sense and stabilize receptor states by directly interacting with state determinants. Given their important role in modulating GPCR activity, we  specifically mapped switches, that is, determinant residues, that alternate contacts across the inactive/active states. In class A, two switches (R350 and 558) have direct G-protein interactions, whereas five switches are in transmembrane helices and between  ligand and G-protein positionsthereby facilitating signal trans - duction across the membrane. Class B1 switches are distributed  across orthosteric ligand (649), G protein (350, 756 and 757) and two other (554 and 749) positions. Class C uniquely has no switches and the single switch of class F is located in position 4551, which is a ligand-interacting position in ECL2. These findings show that switches are spread throughout the 7TM bundle. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Altogether,  the functional mapping may help to explain observed effects on  ligand or G-protein affinity from remote mutations, and presents a residue-level rationale for conformational selection 35 and allosteric  modulation36. Discussion We present molecular mechanistic maps for activation across the GPCR superfamily and helix macro/microscale residues while extending beyond the transmembrane region to H8 and structur - ally conserved loop segments. This study has shown that activa - tion of other classes cannot be modeled on the basis of class A. Our findings demonstrate that, although they belong to the same superfamily, use the same structural scaffold and share several helix  macroswitches, the GPCR classes differ in their microswitch residue  positions, contacts and amino acids. This applies also to class B1, which shares about half of the determinant positions in class A, as the similarity is very small if considering the type of determinant stabilizing an inactive, active or both statesand their specific con - sensus amino acids. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'This highlights the need to elucidate restraints  and diverse activation mechanisms separately for each GPCR class and in more detail, to adequately capture structure-function rela - tionships. Determinants of receptor activity are closely tied to the molecular mechanisms of conformational selection 35 and allosteric  modulation36, and influence an array of functions and responses,  including ligand affinity, basal activity, efficacy and G-protein cou - pling. Therefore, the contact maps (Fig. 4) presented here provide an actionable foundation for the field, to design and interpret exper - iments across structural, biophysical (for example, fluorescence and double electronelectron resonance (DEER)), molecular dynam - ics and mutagenesis studies. The maps also inform drug discovery of which inactivating and activating state determinants are in the orthosteric and allosteric ligand sites and may therefore be exploited  to design inverse agonists, neutral antagonists or agonists for differ - ent receptors. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'The extensive engineering and limited resolution of some  structures is an inherent limitation for all structure-based studies. Therefore, more native-like structures and advances in their deter - mination are of utmost value and will serve to continuously refine  structure-function relationships generally. For example, the univer - sal TM5 switch reported herein was not discernible until cryo-EM allowed for more structures with a native TM5ICL3TM6 region (often subjected to deletion and protein fusion specifically in crys - tallography). It has furthermore been suggested that there are sequential conformational changes during GPCR activation and G-protein coupling, with transient intermediate states facilitat - ing the transition of the extensive conformational rearrangement, which is not captured by currently available complex structures 37,38.  The proposed intermediate-state complexes may require additional state determinants beyond the ones identified here. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Hence, going  forward, it will be important to combine structural studies with  biophysical investigations, such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based systems 39, DEER40, NMR41 or even mass  spectroscopy42, for monitoring specific interactions in more infre - quent conformations. Fig. 6 | Residue positions stabilizing an inactive and/ or active receptor state. GPCR snakeplots mapping the residue positions that form distinct contacts  between state determinants classified as inactivators (blue), activators (red) and switches (magenta). Residues are denoted with the consensus amino acid of the investigated receptor structures (Supplementary T able 1) and their generic residue number 26. Filled positions map ligand- (gray) and G-protein  (orange) interaction frequency among all GPCR structures in the given class that have such data (Supplementary Data 2). Allosteric ligand-interacting positions outside of the upper part of the transmembrane helix domain and ECL2 (the orthosteric binding pocket in classes A, B1 and F) are omitted. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Border grayscale denotes the frequency of mutations changing the ligand affinity or activity over fivefold. The label Mid within hexagon-shaped positions denotes the membrane mid, above and below which the ligand positions are subdivided into upper 7T m and ECL2 or other). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyOur combined contact frequency and residue-pair conservation  cut-offs uniquely address the class representativeness and allow the  GPCR superfamily to be described. Classes A, B1, C and F have a 60, 42, 81 and 82% average conservation of determinant consensus amino acids, respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 9, 'content': 'For these reasons, the common conserved determinants identified herein should still apply as our knowledge  Y43 L61N47L53F36Q37 E50 L54I47 F54 I57L38S41T42L43V44L45I46L49G50I51H52Y53F56 K37 L42 L44G45 Q49 L56Y57L50R51G49N50 V53T37T39N40F42I43A47D50 I40F41 L43 I46 D49R50I49 P50L51M54 Y58A34L37A38V40V41F44C47W48L40 S46 N49P50 I52Y53A54 E49F50 R51MidMid Mid Mid Mid Mid F57L48 Mid MidMidMidMidMidClass A Class C Class FClass B1 H8TM1T M2 TM3T M4 TM5T M6 TM7ICL1TMa1 TM2T M3 TM4T M5 TM6T M7 H8 H8 State stabiliz er type: Inactiv atorF42 Activ atorF42 SwitchF42Interactions with: Ligand G protein (% of GPCRs with data)Mutation-changing ligand activity >fiv efold (% of GPCRs with data)State-deter minant mapping Positions in volved in binding of: Ligand G protein 2%29% 30%36% 10% 10%10%0 % Y51V52TM1T M2 TM3T M4 TM5T M6 TM7ECL2 I36 T50 L52T53Y39C50Y51W58F29 Y33F34 M37 S39 W43 T47L48 W50 L52A53S42I60 A45 F461V47 G58 L62 M30R32Y51F55K41 F43M44 W55I56 W54Mid Mid H8ICL1TM1T M2 TM3T M4TM5TM6T M7 T47 S53N52 M51 A54 N61 N64I42L43Y50 A43 K50T51I42D43M36 Y46K47 L57 E35F48ECL2 MidMidMid Mid MidMidMidMid MidMid Mid A54 A38 NAtuRE StRuC tuRAl & MolECulAR BioloG y | VOL 28 | NOVEMBER 2021 | 879888 | www.nature.com/nsmb 887', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyexpands from new structures, which could also allow additional  determinants to fulfill these cut-offs. Furthermore, although spe - cific receptors and subsets thereof could have additional activation mechanisms not conserved in the whole class, such specific and general mechanisms, respectively, could act in concert. online content Any methods, additional references, Nature Research report - ing summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary infor - mation, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41594-021-00674-7. Received: 23 March 2021; Accepted: 22 September 2021;   Published online: 10 November 2021 References  1. Kolakowski, L. F. Jr. GCRDb: a G-protein-coupled receptor database. Recept.  Channels  2, 17 (1994).  2. Attwood, T. K. & Findlay, J. B. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Design of a discriminating fingerprint for  G-protein-coupled receptors. Protein Eng.  6, 167176 (1993).  3. Attwood, T. K. & Findlay, J. B. Fingerprinting G-protein-coupled receptors. Protein Eng.  7, 195203 (1994).  4. Fredriksson, R., Lagerstrom, M. C., Lundin, L. G. & Schioth, H. B. The G-protein-coupled receptors in the human genome form five main families. Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. Mol. Pharmacol.   63, 12561272 (2003).  5. Nordstrom, K. J., Sallman Almen, M., Edstam, M. M., Fredriksson, R. & Schioth, H. B. Independent HHsearch, NeedlemanWunsch-based, and motif analyses reveal the overall hierarchy for most of the G protein-coupled receptor families. Mol. Biol. Evol. 28, 24712480 (2011).  6. Foster, S. R. et al. Discovery of human signaling systems: pairing peptides to G protein-coupled receptors. Cell  179, 895908.e21 (2019).  7. Hauser, A. S., Attwood, M. M., Rask-Andersen, M., Schioth, H. B. & Gloriam, D. E. Trends in GPCR drug discovery: new agents, targets and indications. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.  16, 829842 (2017).  8. Sriram, K. & Insel, P . A. G protein-coupled receptors as targets for approved drugs: how many targets and how many drugs? Mol. Pharmacol.  93,   251258 (2018).  9. Santos, R. et al. A comprehensive map of molecular drug targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.  16, 1934 (2017).  10. Flock, T. et al. Selectivity determinants of GPCRG-protein binding. Nature   545, 317322 (2017).  11. Zhou, Q. et al. Common activation mechanism of class A GPCRs. eLife  8,  e50279 (2019).  12. Nygaard, R., Frimurer, T. M., Holst, B., Rosenkilde, M. M. & Schwartz, T. W . Ligand binding and micro-switches in 7TM receptor structures. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.  30, 249259 (2009).  13. Carpenter, B. & Tate, C. G. Active state structures of G protein-coupled receptors highlight the similarities and differences in the G protein and arrestin coupling interfaces. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 45, 124132 (2017).  14. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Diverse activation pathways in class A GPCRs converge near the G-protein-coupling region. Nature  536, 484487 (2016).  15. Schonegge, A. M. et al. Evolutionary action and structural basis of the allosteric switch controlling  2AR functional selectivity. Nat. Commun.  8,  2169 (2017).  16. Hauser, A. S. et al. Pharmacogenomics of GPCR drug targets. Cell  172,  4154.e19 (2018).  17. Schoneberg, T. & Liebscher, I. Mutations in G protein-coupled receptors:  mechanisms, pathophysiology and potential therapeutic approaches.  Pharmacol. Rev.  73, 89119 (2021).  18. Wu, F. et al. Full-length human GLP-1 receptor structure without orthosteric ligands. Nat. Commun.  11, 1272 (2020).  19. Schoneberg, T., Schultz, G. & Gudermann, T. Structural basis of G  protein-coupled receptor function. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 151, 181193 (1999).  20. Liang, Y . L. et al. Toward a structural understanding of class B GPCR peptide  binding and activation. Mol. Cell 77, 656668.e5 (2020).  21. Hilger, D. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Structural insights into differences in G protein activation by  family A and family B GPCRs. Science  369, eaba3373 (2020).  22. Zhang, X. et al. Differential GLP-1R binding and activation by peptide and  non-peptide agonists. Mol. Cell 80, 485500.e7 (2020). 23. Capper, M. J. & Wacker, D. How the ubiquitous GPCR receptor family selectively activates signalling pathways. Nature  558, 529530 (2018).  24. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. et al. Molecular signatures of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature  494, 185194 (2013).  25. Tehan, B. G., Bortolato, A., Blaney, F. E., Weir, M. P . & Mason, J. S. Unifying family A GPCR theories of activation. Pharmacol. Ther.  143, 5160 (2014).  26. Isberg, V . et al. Generic GPCR residue numbersaligning topology maps  while minding the gaps. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 36, 2231 (2015).  27. Wright, S. C. et al. A conserved molecular switch in class F receptors  regulates receptor activation and pathway selection. Nat. Commun.  10, 667  (2019).  28. Turku, A., Schihada, H., Kozielewicz, P ., Bowin, C. F. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': '& Schulte, G. Residue  6.43 defines receptor function in class F GPCRs. Nat. Commun.  12,   3919 (2021).  29. Rasmussen, S. G. et al. Structure of a nanobody-stabilized active state of the   2 adrenoceptor. Nature  469, 175180 (2011).  30. Wacker, D. et al. Structural features for functional selectivity at serotonin receptors. Science  340, 615619 (2013).  31. Huang, W . et al. Structural insights into micro-opioid receptor activation. Nature  524, 315321 (2015).  32. White, K. L. et al. Structural connection between activation micros witch and allosteric sodium site in GPCR signaling. Structure  26,   259269 e255 (2018).  33. Palczewski, K. et al. Crystal structure of rhodopsin: a G protein-coupled receptor. Science  289, 739745 (2000).  34. de Graaf, C., Foata, N., Engkvist, O. & Rognan, D. Molecular modeling of the second extracellular loop of G-protein coupled receptors and its implication on structure-based virtual screening. Proteins 71, 599620 (2008).  35. Kenakin, T. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Biased receptor signaling in drug discovery. Pharmacol. Rev.  71,  267315 (2019).  36. DeVree, B. T. et al. Allosteric coupling from G protein to the agonist-binding pocket in GPCRs. Nature  535, 182186 (2016).  37. Liu, X. et al. Structural insights into the process of GPCR-G protein complex formation. Cell https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.021 (2019).  38. Du, Y . et al. Assembly of a GPCR-G protein complex. Cell  177, 12321242. e11 (2019).  39. Gregorio, G. G. et al. Single-molecule analysis of ligand efficacy in  2ARG-protein activation. Nature  547, 6873 (2017).  40. Lerch, M. T. et al. Viewing rare conformations of the 2 adrenergic receptor  with pressure-resolved DEER spectroscopy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,  3182431831 (2020).  41. Ma, X. et al. Analysis of 2AR-Gs and 2AR-Gi complex formation by NMR  spectroscopy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 2309623105 (2020).  42. Bolla, J. R., Fiorentino, F. & Robinson, C. V . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Mass spectrometry informs the structure and dynamics of membrane proteins involved in lipid and drug transport. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 70, 5360 (2021).  43. Lomize, M. A., Pogozheva, I. D., Joo, H., Mosberg, H. I. & Lomize, A. L. OPM database and PPM web server: resources for positioning of proteins in membranes. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D370D376 (2012).  44. Cherezov, V . et al. High-resolution crystal structure of an engineered human  2-adrenergic G protein-coupled receptor. Science  318, 12581265 (2007).  45. Rasmussen, S. G. et al. Crystal structure of the 2 adrenergic receptorGs  protein complex. Nature  477, 549555 (2011).  46. Mao, C. et al. Cryo-EM structures of inactive and active GABAB receptor. Cell Res. 30, 564573 (2020).  47. Wang, C. et al. Structure of the human smoothened receptor bound to an antitumour agent. Nature  497, 338343 (2013).  48. Qi, X., Friedberg, L., De Bose-Boyd, R., Long, T. & Li, X. Sterols in an intramolecular channel of Smoothened mediate Hedgehog signaling. Nat. Chem. Biol. 16, 13681375 (2020). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Publishers note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons  Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articles Creative Commons license,  unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in  the articles Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu- tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly  from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 10, 'content': ' The Author(s) 2021 NAtuRE StRuC tuRAl & MolECulAR BioloG y | VOL 28 | NOVEMBER 2021 | 879888 | www.nature.com/nsmb 888', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyMethods Structure annotation and selection of representative template dataset. We  annotated 510 GPCR structures from the Protein Data Bank49. These were all class  A and B1 GPCR structures released before 1 November 2020, and all class C and  F GPCR structures released by July 2021 (due to the relatively few templates, the  two latter classes were updated during manuscript revision). For the two GABAB12  heterodimer structures (PDB 7C7Q and 7C7S), two additional artificial structures (PDB YZ01 and YZ02, respectively) were used herein to separate the GABA B1  monomer from the GABAB12 monomer. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'We selected a representative structure of  each GPCR and inactive or active state by applying comprehensive filter criteria spanning completeness of receptor and G protein (83% and 43% of generic residue positions, respectively), sequence identity >90% to human, resolution  3.6 , degree active 50 (20% and 90% for inactive and active structures,  respectively) and consistent ligand modality and state50 (inverse agonist/antagonist  inactive and agonist active). For representative templates of the active state, a  G-protein complex was required. For GABAB2Gi1 the PDB entry (7C7Q) does not  include the G protein and the complex structure model was instead received from the authors (the EM data are deposited in the EMDB database under EMD-30300) (Supplementary Data 1) 46. Transmembrane helix rearrangement analysis. Two-dimensional (2D) plots for TM17 segment movement at the extracellular end, cytosolic end and membrane  mid, respectively, were produced using our webserver for comparative structure  analysis (http://review.gpcrdb.org/structure_comparison/comparative_analysis and  ref.  50). Class counts of moving TM17 were calculated as the sum of consensus  movements above 1.0 . Segment (TM17, H8 and loops) contact analysis. Activation-dependent changes in segment networks were determined using 2D network plots of segment contacts 50. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Segment switches (or helix switches) were defined as the segments with  distinct contacts (see Generic residue numbering) in both states. Generic residue numbering. Corresponding residue positions in each class were  indexed with the structure-based GPCRdb generic residue numbering system26.  This builds on the sequence-based generic residue numbering systems for classes A (BallesterosWeinstein), B1 (Wootten), C (Pin) and F (Wang), but preserves gaps from a structural alignment of two receptors caused by a unique helix bulge or constriction in the sequence alignment, thereby avoiding offset of these and the following residues. All schemes assign residue numbers relative to the most conserved amino acid residue, which is given the number 50, and prefixed with the TM helix number (for example, 332 is on TM3 and 18 positions before the reference). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'This generic residue numbering scheme also uniquely indexes H8 and structurally conserved loop segments, which are numbered by the preceding and following TM helix (for example, 45 is ECL2 located between TM4 and TM5). State-stabilizing contact identification. State-stabilizing contacts were identified  using the Structure comparison tool 50. The most distinct contact in class A  (149750 contact) has 80% higher frequency in the inactive than in the active state, and the specificity of state-specific contacts depends on the number of members and templates in each class. To obtain comparable numbers of networks and contacts, we therefore adjusted the class frequency difference thresholds accordingly (no. members and inactive/active-state templates): A: 40% (285, 33/14), B1: 67% (15, 3/10), C: 75% (22, 4/2) and F: 100% (11, 2/2). To ensure that the identified determinants have a wide role in each class, we also applied a sequence conservation cut-off. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'This cut-off requires the amino acids pairs that make up a state-specific contact to be conserved, and therefore able to be formed in at least 30% of all receptors in the given GPCR class. The remaining residues, referred to as state determinants or state stabilizers , were further classified into inactivators , activators and switches on the basis of whether their most frequent contact occurs in inactive, active and both states, respectively. State-determinant topological mapping in relation to ligand and G-protein sites.  We mapped state stabilizers to functional sites to ligand and G-protein sites using the comparative structure analysis tool of GPCRdb 50. Allosteric ligand-interacting  positions outside the upper part of the transmembrane helix domain and ECL2 (the orthosteric binding pocket in classes A, B1 and F) were omitted. Mutagenesis and BRET-based signaling assay. Codon-optimized human   2-adrenoceptor (2) was cloned into pcDNA3.1 with an N-terminal signal  sequence, Twin-Strep-tag and SNAP-tag. All biosensor constructs were in  pcDNA3.1 (G15 biosensor51 and Gs sensor:52,53). Mutations were made as described  in ref. 54. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Biosensor and receptor DNA was transiently transfected into HEKSL cells  (a gift from S. Laporte). Cell culture and transfection was performed as described in ref.  55. After incubation for two days at 37 C with 5% CO2, DMEM was replaced  with Tyrodes buffer (137 mM NaCl, 0.9 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 11.9 mM NaHCO3,  3.6 mM NaH2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, 5.5 mM glucose,1 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4), followed  by incubation for at least 30 min at 37 C. Ligand was added 10 min before  the measurement and the luciferase substrate coelenterazine 400a (Nanolight Technology) was added 5 min before the measurement. Coelenterazine 400a was added to a final concentration of 5 M and ligand concentrations ranged from  31.6 nM to 3.16 mM in half-log steps. In addition, a buffer control was included.  BRET was read in a Synergy Neo (Biotek) plate reader at 410 and 515 nm. All  signaling experiments were done in biological triplicates. Statistics. For the experimental alanine mutations of predicted state-changing and  nonstate-changing residues (Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': '5), statistical significance has been assessed by a  two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test (n = 6 for each category, individual data points  in Supplementary Table 2). Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All data are available in GPCRdb (https://review.gpcrdb.org), GitHub (https://github.com/protwis/gpcrdb_data) and Supplementary Data 1 and 2. Code availability No code was developed for this manuscript, which instead used the existing GPCRdb 56 resources, including a new comparative structure analysis platform50.  All open-source code can be obtained from GitHub (https://github.com/protwis/protwis ) under the permissive Apache 2.0 License (https://www.apache.org/ licenses/LICENSE-2.0). A complete list of the software used for data analysis is available from the Nature Research Reporting Summary. References  49. Burley, S. K. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'RCSB Protein Data Bank: biological macromolecular structures enabling research and education in fundamental biology, biomedicine, biotechnology and energy. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,   D464D474 (2019).  50. Gloriam, D., Kooistra, A., Munk, C. & Hauser, A. An online GPCR structure analysis platform. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-021- 00675-6 (2021).  51. Avet, C. et al. Effector membrane translocation biosensors reveal G protein and -arrestin profiles of 100 therapeutically relevant GPCRs. Preprint at  bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.052027 (2020).  52. Gals, C. et al. Probing the activation-promoted structural rearrangements in preassembled receptor-G protein complexes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 13,  778786 (2006).  53. Gals, C. et al. Real-time monitoring of receptor and G-protein interactions in living cells. Nat. Methods  2, 177184 (2005).  54. Heydenreich, F. M. et al. High-throughput mutagenesis using a two-fragment PCR approach. Sci. Rep. 7, 6787 (2017).  55. Heydenreich, F. M. et al. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Vasopressin V2 is a promiscuous G protein-coupled receptor that is biased by its peptide ligands. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi. org/10.1101/2021.01.28.427950 (2021).  56. Kooistra, A. J. et al. GPCRdb in 2021: integrating GPCR sequence, structure and function. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D335D343 (2021). Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Lundbeck Foundation (grants R163-2013-16327  and R218-2016-1266), the Novo Nordisk Foundation (grant NNF18OC0031226)  and Independent Research Fund Denmark, Natural Sciences (grant 8021-00173B) to D.E.G., the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (ALSAC) to M.M.B., a Marie Skodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant 844622) and the American Heart  Association (grant 19POST34380839) to F.M.H., the Canadian Institute for Health  Research (grant FDN-148431) to M.B. and the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 159748) to D.B.V . Author contributions D.E.G. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'provided conceptualization of the project. A.J.K. and F.M.H. undertook data  curation. Formal analysis was performed by A.S.H., D.E.G. and F.M.H. Funding  acquisition was by D.B.V ., D.E.G., M.B. and M.M.B. Investigations were carried out by D.E.G. and F.M.H. D.E.G., C.M. and A.J.K. designed the methodology. Project administration was by D.E.G. Resources were provided by M.B. Software was designed by A.J.K. and C.M. D.E.G., D.B.V . and M.B. supervised the project. Validation was  performed by A.J.K., D.E.G. and F.M.H. Visualization was by D.E.G., A.S.H. and A.J.K. D.E.G. wrote the original draft and D.E.G., F.M.H. and M.M.B. reviewed and edited the  manuscript. The manuscript was read and approved by all authors. Competing interests M.B. is the president of Domain Therapeutics scientific advisory board. D.B.V . is a founder and a director of Z7 Biotech Ltd. After the completion of this study, C.M. moved to become an employee of Novozymes A/S. The other authors declare no competing interests. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 11, 'content': 'NAtuRE StRuC tuRAl & MolECulAR BioloG y | www.nature.com/nsmb', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyAdditional information Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-021-00674-7. Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material  available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-021-00674-7. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to David E. Gloriam.Peer review information Nature Structural & Molecular Biology thanks Ka Y oung Chung  and Brian Shoichet for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer  reports are available. Florian Ullrich was the primary editor on this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGy Extended Data Fig. 1 | t M1-7 movement of class A receptor pairs upon activation. T ransmembrane helix movement at the extracellular face, membrane  mid and intracellular face based on comparison of representative inactive and active state structure pairs of class A GPCRs (Extended Data T able 1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyExtended Data Fig. 2 | t M1-7 movement of class B1, C and F receptor pairs upon activation. T ransmembrane helix movement at the extracellular face,  membrane mid and intracellular face based on comparison of representative inactive and active state structure pairs of class B1, C and F GPCRs (Extended  Data T able 1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'GPCR activation mechanisms across classes and macro/microscales', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Articles NATuRE STRuCTuRAl & MolECulAR BIoloGyExtended Data Fig. 3 | State determinants conserved across classes. Heatmap of state determinants shared by at least two GPCR classes along with their  consensus amino acid and residues in representative receptors. Each row contains corresponding positions denoted with the generic residue numbers in  each class1. Key class A state determinants are shown in bold. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'STRUCTURAL BIOLOGY Conformational selection guides b-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein coupled receptor Andrew B. Kleist1,2, Shawn Jenjak1, Andrija Sente3, Lauren J. Laskowski4, Martyna Szpakowska5, Maggie M. Calkins4, Emilie I. Anderson4, Lisa M. McNally4, Raimond Heukers6, Vladimir Bobkov6, Francis C. Peterson1, Monica A. Thomas1,2, Andy Chevign5, Martine J. Smit6, John D. McCorvy4, M. Madan Babu7,8, Brian F. Volkman1* G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) recruit b-arrestins to coordinate diverse cellular processes, but the structural dynamics driving this process are poorly understood. Atypical chemokine receptors (ACKRs) are intrinsically biased GPCRs that engage b-arrestins but not G proteins, making them a model system for investigating the structural basis of b-arrestin recruitment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Here, we performed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments on13CH3-emethionine labeled ACKR3, revealing that b-arrestin recruitment is associated with conformational exchange at key regions of the extracellular ligand-binding pocket and intracellular b-arrestin coupling region. NMR studies of ACKR3 mutants defective in b-arrestin recruitment identified an allosteric hub in the receptor core that coordinates transitions among heterogeneously populated and selected conformational states. Our data suggest that conformational selection guides b-arrestin recruitment by tuning receptor dynamics at intracellular and extracellular regions. Once thought of as G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) off-switches, b-arrestins are now known to coordinate diverse,Gp r o t e i n independent signaling re- sponses ( 1). In a phenomenon called biased signaling,some GPCR ligands (biased ligands) preferentially recruit b-arrestins or G proteins ( 2). Because they select one pathway, and therefore a specific functional outcome, biased ligands have demonstrated advantages over conventional ligands in preclinical ( 35) and clinical ( 6,7) testing. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'More than 30% of US Food & Drug Administration approved drugs target GPCRs ( 8), so understanding the mechanistic basis by which GPCRs recruit b-arrestins has important implications for drug development. Recent GPCR b-arrestin structures ( 911) and biophysical studies of b-arrestin biased ligands ( 1214) provide mechanistic insights intob-arrestin recruitment. For instance, struc-tural comparisons of GPCRs bound to antago- nists and b-arrestin biased ligands suggest that ligand-specific conformational changes gov-ernb-arrestin recruitment ( 12,13). Despite this progress, how ligand-binding pocket changes are transmitted to the b-arrestin interface re- mains poorly understood. Other findings have complicated our understanding of b-arrestin recruitment by GPCRs. The identification of multiple, distinct b-arrestin recruiting GPCR conformations suggests there may be multiple conformational solutions to b-arrestin recruit- ment ( 15), but raises the question of how such different conformations could elicit similar outcomes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Conversely, nearly identical confor- mations of b-arrestin and G protein bound GPCRs ( 911) suggest that conformational changes alone might not account for b-arrestin recruitment. Finally, some studies of b-arrestin recruitment use ligands that provoke re- sidual signaling at G proteins ( 16), making it challenging to isolate the specific molecular changes leading to b-arrestin recruitment. Given these complexities, studies of b-arrestin recruitment could benefit from functionally decoupled receptors that exclusively recruit b-arrestin. Atypical chemokine receptors (ACKRs) represent one such naturally occurring system. ACKR3 is an intrinsically b-arrestin biased GPCR that recruits b-arrestin but does not acti- vate G protein (Fig. 1A) ( 17). Here, we performed nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies of ACKR3, showing that b-arrestin recruitment at an intrinsically biased GPCR is guided by tuning its conformational equilibrium. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'RESULTS In agreement with prior studies, ACKR3 re- cruits b-arrestin but does not activate G pro- tein signaling (Fig. 1, A and B; fig. S1A; andtable S1). To investigate the mechanisms under- lying b-arrestin recruitment at ACKR3, we first measured b-arrestin-2 recruitment in response to a panel of ACKR3 agonists, including the endogenous chemokine CXCL12 [median effec- tive concentration (EC 50)=0 . 7 5n M ]( 18), the small molecule CCX777 (EC 50=0 . 9 5n M ;m a x - imum effect ( Emax, % of CXCL12) = 75  2%] (19) ,a n dar e c e n t l yd e s c r i b e dp e p t i d eL I H 3 8 3 (EC 50= 4.8 nM; Emax= 83  1%) (Fig. 1C) ( 20). We also identified a potent, extracellular- targeting, ACKR3-competitive antagonist nanobody called VUN701 [median inhibitory concentration (IC 50)=1 . 4 7 mM] using nano- body phage display (Fig. 1C; fig. S1, B to F; and materials and methods). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'These four ligands display a range of activities for b-arrestin-2 recruitment, allowing us to sample inactive (i.e., VUN701-bound) and active (i.e., CCX777-, LIH383-, and CXCL12-bound) b-arrestin  recruiting states of ACKR3 (Fig. 1D). NMR spectroscopy allows simultaneous characterization of receptor conformation at multiple sites ( 21). We previously purified 13CH3-e-Met labeled, ACKR3-bound CCX777 in lauryl maltose neopent yl glycol/cholesteryl hemisuccinate (MNG/CHS) micelles for NMR studies ( 22), and we used this method for other ACKR3-ligand complexes here (Fig. 1E, figs. S2 and S3, and materials and methods). As with other GPCRs, copurification with ligands was necessary to produce sufficient quantities of ACKR3 for NMR studies ( 23). Structural ho- mology modeling of ACKR3 (fig. S4 and materials and methods) demonstrates eight native Met residues (excluding the N-terminal Met) distributed in ACKR3 s tertiary structure for NMR labeling. NMR labels serve as sensi- tive probes reporting on regional changes in GPCR conformation and dynamics ( 24,25). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'In this setting, Met2125x39and Met1383x46[where the superscripts indicate GPCRdb nomenclature (26)] are well positioned to report on confor- mational changes associated with b-arrestin re- c r u i t m e n ta tA C K R 3b e c a u s et h e ya r el o c a t e d in key regions of the ligand-binding pocket (27,28) and intracellular effector binding in- terface ( 29), respectively. Ligand interactions with TM5 play key roles in GPCR activation ( 27,30), but how confor- mational changes in TM5 lead to b-arrestin recruitment is unclear. NMR spectra for the four ligand-bound stat es show chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) for the Met2125x39peak, which remains colinear along the1Ha x i sb u t variable along the13C axis (Fig. 2, A and B). This indicates that ACKR3 exists along a two- state equilibrium, with the peaks at either ex- treme defining the conformational end points (31). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'In the CCX777-bound state, downfield peak positions [~18.2 to 19 parts per million (p.p.m.)] indicate that13CH3is in a trans rota- mer (end point 1), whereas in the CXCL12- and LIH383-bound states, upfield peak positionsRESEARCH Kleist et al.,Science 377, 222 228 (2022) 8 July 2022 1o f7 1Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.2Medical Scientist Training Program, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.3MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.4Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin,Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.5Immuno-Pharmacology and Interactomics, Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH), L-4354 Esch-sur- Alzette, Luxembourg.6Amsterdam Institute for Molecular and Life Sciences, Division of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty ofSciences, Vrije Universiteit, 1081 HZ Amsterdam, Netherlands.7Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. 8Center for Data Driven Discovery, St. Jude Children s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. *Corresponding author. Email: bvolkman@mcw.edu These authors contributed equally to this work. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Present address: Harriet Lane Pediatric Residency Program, Johns Hopkins Child- rens Center, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Present address: QVQ Holding BV, 3584 CL Utrecht, Netherlands. Present address: Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Downloaded from https://www.science.org at St. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 2, 'content': '(~16 to 16.5 p.p.m.) indicate that13CH 3is in agauche rotamer (end point 2) (Fig. 2B and fig. S5, A and B) ( 22,3234). By contrast, in VUN701-bound ACKR3, the Met2125x39peak appears between the two end points at the random coil13CH3position, indi- cating fast conformational exchange between gauche and trans rotamers in the inactive, b-arrestin nonrecruiting state (Fig. 2B). In- deed, CSPs of Met2125x39from13CH3random coil vary by ligand type (fig. S5A), suggest- ing that b-arrestin recruitment is associated with decreasing exchange among Met2125x39 rotamers irrespective of which c3rotamericstate is selected. Antagonists such as VUN701 may fail to constrain the region sampled by Met2125x39, preserving conformational hetero- geneity (seen by increased exchange relative to the active state) and precluding TM5-binding pocket stabilization required for ACKR3 acti- vation. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Binding data show that Ala mutagen- esis of Met2125x39similarly affects CXCL12 and VUN701, suggesting that NMR changes be- tween inactive and active states likely represent functionally important regional conformational changes, as opposed to differences in direct ligand contacts at the probe residue (fig. S5, C to E, and table S1). Indeed, Met212Ala5x39has equivalent efficacy for b-arrestin recruit- ment as wild type (WT) (fig. S5F), indicating that Met2125x39reports on but does not itself mediate functional cha nges in the TM5 region. Does this occur in other GPCRs? We iden- tified all ligand-contacting residues among structures of (i) GPCRs bound to b-arrestin  biased ligands (or full-length b-arrestin; joint- ly called b-arresting recruiting states) and (ii) inactive-state structures of the same GPCRs (fig. S6, A and B). Using contact network analysis (29,35), we found that ligands in b-arrestin  recruiting states make similar numbers of contacts with residues in TM5 but significantly Kleist et al.,Science 377, 222 228 (2022) 8 July 2022 2o f7 Fig. 1. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 2, 'content': 'b-arrestin biased signaling at ACKR3 and structural characterization by NMR. (A) CXCL12 activates b-arrestin but not G protein at ACKR3. ( B) CXCL12- mediated cAMP inhibition of CXCR4 (positive control) and ACKR3 as shown by Glosensor assay (EC 50= 0.21 nM, CXCR4) (top). CXCL12-mediated b-arrestin-2 recruitment to ACKR3 as shown by Tango assay (EC 50= 3.9 nM, ACKR3) (bottom). N= 3 in triplicate in both assays. Error bars indicate SEM. ( C)b-arrestin recruitment to ACKR3 as shown by Nano-BiT assay. VUN701 dose response alone could not be fit (black circles). Purple circles reflect VUN701 dose response with CXCL12 at 3.2 nM . See text and table S1 for EC 50andEmax. All conditions, N=3i n duplicate. Error bars indicate SEM. ( D) Summary of ligand potency at b-arrestinrecruitment. Structures are not to scale. CXCL12 PDB: 2KEC; nanobody from PDB 6KNM used to represent VUN701, and LIH383 and CCX777 were modeled in PyMol. LIH383 sequence is FGGFMRRK ( 20). The chemical structure of CCX777 is shown in ( 19). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 2, 'content': '(E)1H-13C heteronuclear single quantum coherence NMR spectra of WT-ACKR3 with various ligands at 310 K. Assigned Met residues are labeled. Asterisk denotes inferred assignments from other ligand-bound states (see the materials and methods). Negative contour peaks are shown in semitransparency and dashed lines. Peaks marked aencompass natural abundance peaks from buffer and detergent components (see also figs. S2G and S3). All spectra are shown at the same contour except LIH383, which was lowered to represent M2125x39.RESEARCH |REPORT Downloaded from https://www.science.org at St. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 3, 'content': 'more contacts with residues in ECL2 and TM7 than do antagonists (Fig. 2C). Thus, TM5 may anchor agonist interactions with ECL2 and TM7 ( 27,36), creating a tripartite lock involving the 5x39 region (Fig. 2D and fig. S6C), whereas antagonists fail to stabilize all three lock points (ECL2, TM5, and TM7) simultaneously. Large-scale conformat ional changes underly- ing GPCR activation are driven by local re- arrangements of residues at key positions in the GPCR structure (so-called microswitch residues ( 37). We next examined Met1383x46,a microswitch residue in the b-arrestin couplingregion (Fig. 2A) ( 29). In the three agonist- bound states (CXCL12-, CCX777-, and LIH383- bound), the Met1383x46NMR peak has nearly identical chemical shifts (Fig. 2E), indicating that all three agonists elicit a shared confor- mation of Met1383x46. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 3, 'content': 'The upfield position (~1.3 p.p.m.) of Met1383x46in the1H dimension likely reflects ring current shifts caused by prox- imity to an aromatic side chain ( 33,38,39). These data indicate that the agonist-specific conformations of Met2125x39(i.e., trans ver- susgauche )i nt h eT M 5 - b i n d i n gp o c k e ta r e funneled into a common conformation attheb-arrestin coupling region sampled by M1383x46. By contrast, the inactive, VUN701-bound ACKR3 state is characterized by CSPs of the Met1383x46peak in both1Ha n d13Cv a l u e s (Fig. 2E), indicating diminished ring-current shift (1H dimension), depletion of the gauche rotamer (13C dimension), and more gauche / trans exchange (13C dimension). As in the binding pocket, VUN701 causes the smallest CSP from random coil13CH3-e-Met versus the three agonists, suggesting that agonists reg- ulate b-arrestin recruitment by decreasing Kleist et al.,Science 377, 222 228 (2022) 8 July 2022 3o f7 Fig. 2. Conformational changes in the ligand-binding pocket and intracellular region characterize the b-arrestin recruiting state. (A) ACKR3 model depicting M2125x39and M1383x46probes. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 3, 'content': '( B) Overlay of M2125x39peaks from ligand-bound ACKR3 complexes at 310 K. The 16 to 16.5 and 18.5 to 19 p.p.m. peaks (13C) correspond to gauche and trans rotameric states, respectively. Ligand-specific b-arrestin activity is depicted at right. Open and closed locks depict conformational sampling and restriction, respectively (bottom). (C) Ligand-residue interactions were compared between antagonist and b-arrestin biased ligand-bound GPCRs (see the materials and methods). Shown is a comparison of the mean number of ligand contacts with TM5, ECL2, and TM7 residues. * P<0 . 0 5 ;* * P< 0.005, unpaired ttest. ( D)A T 1Rcontacts with the ligand TRV023 ( b-arrestin biased; black outline) in TM5, ECL2, and TM7 are shown as blue spheres (PDB 6OS1). The position of NMR probe 5x39 in AT 1R is shown. Stabilization of TM5-ECL2-TM7 by biased ligands is depicted as a lock (right). ( E) Met1383x46peaks in all four ligand- bound states. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Upfield peak positions (1H: ~1.3 p.p.m.) of M1383x46among agonist-bound states supports ring-current shifts due to aromatic side chain interactions. Peaks are marked aas in Fig. 1. ( F) 3x46 contact residues at 2x43 and 7x53 exclusively in active-state complexes and 6x37 exclusively in inactive-state complexes (see the materials and methods). ( G)b-arrestin recruitment of WT ACKR3 versus Ala mutants of 3x46-contacting mutants by NanoBiT ( N= 3). See also table S1.RESEARCH |REPORT Downloaded from https://www.science.org at St. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 4, 'content': 'conformational heterogeneity in this region of theb-arrestin coupling region relative to the inactive state (fig. S7A). W h a ti st h er o l eo f3 x 4 6 ,ak n o w nm i c r o - switch involved in G protein activation ( 29), in b-arrestin recruitment among other GPCRs? We calculated all intramolecular, residue- residue interactions among structures of (i)b-arrestin-bound and (ii) inactive-state structures of GPCRs with resolved side chains (b1A Ra n dr h o d o p s i n )( f i g .S 7 ,Ba n dC ) ,f i n d i n g that 3x46 contacts 2x43 and 7x53 in b-arrestin- bound structures and 6x37 in inactive structures (Fig. 2F and fig. S7, D to F). Of note 7x53 is a highly conserved Tyr among class A GPCRs ( 37),and 7x53 and 6x37 have been shown to stabi- lize GPCRs in G protein signaling (7x53) and inactive states (6x37), respectively ( 29). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 4, 'content': 'To investigate whether 3x46 and active- state contacts from GPCR- barrestin complexes (2x43 and 7x53) might play a role in b-arrestin recruitment to ACKR3, we tested Met138Ala3x46, Ile84Ala2x43, and Tyr315Ala7x53mutants for b-arrestin recruitment (Fig. 2G and table S1). Although Met138Ala3x46and Ile84Ala2x43min- imally affected ACKR3 function, Tyr315Ala7x53 almost completely abolished b-arrestin re- cruitment, demonstrating the essential role for this residue on ACKR3 activation. The close proximity of 3x46 to Tyr7x53(Fig. 2F andfig. S7, D to F) and the pronounced ring cur- rent shift (1H) of Met1383x46(Fig. 2E) in active but not inactive states of ACKR3 suggest that Met1383x46reports on dynamic alterations in Tyr3157x53associated with b-arrestin recruit- ment ( 33,38,39). Active-state interactions be- tween 3x46 and 7x53 may thus lock this region in place, decreasing local conformational het- erogeneity and increasing the likelihood of b-arrestin engagement. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Indeed, receptors con- tact the b-arrestin finger loop, a key structural region anchoring GPCR- barrestin interactions, directly at or in the vicinity of 3x46 and 7x53 inb1AR- and rhodopsin- arrestin complexes (11,40). By contrast, a more heterogeneous Kleist et al.,Science 377, 222 228 (2022) 8 July 2022 4o f7 Fig. 3. Mutational inactivation of b-arrestin recruitment through the conserved polar network. (A) Position of Asn1273x35in the ACKR3 model relative to Met2125x39and Met1383x46.(B)b-arrestin-2 recruitment with CXCL12 for the ACKR3 mutants Asn127Lys3x35and Asn127Ser3x35as shown by the Tango assay. All conditions, N= 3 in triplicate. Error bars indicate SEM. See also table S1. ( C) Close-up view of1H-13C-HSQC in the Met2125x39region (right), highlighting VUN701-WT-ACKR3 (first panel), CXCL12-ACKR3 Asn127Lys3x35 (second panel), CXCL12-WT-ACKR3 (third panel), and CXCL12-ACKR3 Asn127Ser3x35 (fourth panel). ( D) Overlay of13C-HSQC in the Met1383x46region for WT-ACKR3- VUN701, ACKR3-Asn127Lys3x35-CXCL12, ACKR3-Asn127Ser3x35-CXCL12, and WT-ACKR3-CXCL12 complexes. A shaded triangle suggests peak noncolinearity.Peaks are marked aas in Fig. 1. See fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 4, 'content': 'S8A and legend for the Met1383x46 assignment method. ( E) Normalized CSPs for Met2125x39in the13C dimension (yaxis) and Met1383x46in the1H dimension ( xaxis) from random coil for Asn1273x35mutants and CXCL12- and VUN701-bound WT-ACKR3. Arrows depict transitions among CXCL12-bound WT-ACKR3 and mutant ACKR3. ( F) Depiction of differences between WT-ACKR3 and Asn127Lys3x35in CXCL12-bound states. Despite being bound to CXCL12 (blue key), Asn127Lys3x35locks ACKR3 in the inactive state, abrogating CXCL12 s effects on the Met2125x39and Met1383x46 probes. ( G) Comparison of residue-residue interactions AT 1Rb-arrestin  biased ligand and AT1R-antagonist bound states (top) reveals the formation of a3 x 3 9 7x46 interaction in the b-arrestin state (bottom).RESEARCH |REPORT Downloaded from https://www.science.org at St. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'inactive state (characterized by rotameric ex- change and a diminished ring current shift at Met1383x46) may reflect absent interactions with 7x53 and a lower propensity for b-arrestin engagement (Fig. 2F). To what extent are dynamic changes in extracellular (Met2125x39) and intracellular (Met1383x46) probes allosterically linked through the receptor core during ACKR3 activation? Conserved polar core residues, including the residue Asn3x35(12,41,42), coordinate a sodium ion (inactive state) and a water network (active state) to regulate GPCR activation and bias (Fig. 3A) ( 42). We investigated the effects of known inactivating and constitutively activating muta- tions of conserved polar core residue Asn1273x35 on ACKR3 activation. Consistent with prior re- sults, the Asn127Lys3x35mutation showed com- plete inactivity in b-arrestin recruitment (Fig. 3B), whereas Asn127Ser3x35acts as a constitutively active mutant (Fig. 3B and table S1) ( 43). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'How do Asn1273x35mutants affect the con- formation and stability of the binding pocket and intracellular probes as observed by NMR chemical shifts? In the context of CXCL12, the Asn127Lys3x35mutation shifts the Met2125x39 peak downfield relative to its position in theWT-ACKR3 complex (Fig. 3C and fig. S8A), resembling the VUN701-bound state charac- terized by trans /gauche rotamer exchange at Met212 5x39. This reveals that the receptor core mutation exerts long-range, allosteric ef- fects that enhance conformational exchange in the extracellular ligand-binding pocket. The Asn127Lys3x35mutation shifts the Met1383x46 peak downfield in both the1Ha n d13Cv a l u e s to an intermediate position between those in CXCL12- and VUN701-bound states (Fig. 3D). This peak is not colinear with CXCL12 andVUN701, suggesting the occupancy of a third, distinct conformation in this ACKR3 mutant. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Although Met1383x46in this mutant occupies agauche rotamer (13C: ~16.1 p.p.m.), its1H value is closer to that of VUN701-bound ACKR3, suggesting fewer local aromatic interactions resulting in a diminish ed ring current shift. We speculate that this downfield1Hs h i f tr e - flects increased conformational exchange be- tween both gauche rotamers (i.e., + and )i n the mutant state, which would weaken inter- actions with an aromatic side chain compared with a single gauche rotamer (i.e., + or )i nt h e active state (fig. S8B). Regardless, pronounced downfield1H shifts and peak broadening of Met1383x46in the CXCL12-bound, inactivat- ing Asn127Lys3x35mutant reveal that, as in the ligand-binding pocket, the conserved core mu- tation abrogates b-arrestin-2 recruitment by increasing conformational heterogeneity at a key position in the b-arrestin coupling region (Fig. 3E). Thus, a single mutation in the re- ceptor core, Asn127Lys3x35,d e s t a b i l i z e sA C K R 3 at extracellular and intracellular sites, over- riding the effects of CXCL12 to decrease con- formational exchange present in WT ACKR3 (Fig. 3F). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'In the CXCL12-bound, constitutively active Asn127Ser3x35mutant receptor, Met2125x39 and Met1383x46peaks overlay those in the CXCL12-WT-ACKR3 state (Fig. 3, C to E, and fig. S8A) despite this state s unresponsiveness to CXCL12, indicating that the activating muta- tion promotes conformational homogeneity (no rotameric exchange) extracellularly and intracellularly, even as it decouples allosteric transmembrane communication. By contrast, VUN701 decreases the elevated basal b-arrestin recruitment of ACKR3 Asn127Ser3x35, suggest-ing that it acts as an inverse agonist at this mutant (fig. S8C and table S1). As shown by NMR, the VUN701-bound Asn127Ser3x35mu- tant reverts to the inactive (i.e., trans /gauche interconverting) state at Met2125x39, and the Met1383x46peak is diminished, suggesting tran- sition to a more dynamic state at both probes (fig. S8, D to G). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Among analyzed GPCR structures (i.e., those bound to b-arrestin or b-arrestin biased ligands), AT 1Ri sm o s tc l o s e l yr e l a t e dt oA C K R 3 and is the only one that shares Asn3x35. Cal- culation of intramolec ular, residue-residue interactions of AT 1R bound to antagonists andb-arrestin biased agonists revealed that whereas 3x35 interacts with 7x46, a key residue forb-arrestin recruitment ( 12) in both states, 7x46 interacts with 3x39, which is also involved inb-arrestin recruitment ( 12), only in the active state (Fig. 3G). This rearrangement in turn shifts the register of TM3 and TM7 relative to one another in the region above 3x46 and 7 x 5 3( F i g .3 G ) ,s u g g e s t i n gam e c h a n i s mb y which 3x35 mutations in ACKR3 might be transmitted to the b-arrestin coupling re- gion as observed at the intracellular probe Met1383x46.I ne f f e c t ,A s n3x35mutations in ACKR3 may function by promoting (active) or disrupting (inactive) 3x39 7x46 interac- tions, resulting in decreased (active) or in- creased (inactive) conformational exchange at the intracellular probe. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'DISCUSSION Some studies have identified distinct confor-mational changes associated with b-arrestin recruitment ( 12,13), but others have shown multiple b-arrestin competent conformations (14). How can b-arrestin be both sensitive to and tolerant of GPCR conformational changes? The results presented here help to recon- cile this apparent contradiction by revealing that whereas b-arrestin is tolerant of diverse GPCR conformations in some parts of the re- ceptor, it may have more stringent conforma- tional requirements in other parts. At TM5 of the ligand-binding pocket, we found thatmultiple conformational solutions ( 15)a r e compatible with b-arrestin recruitment. These multiple-binding-pocket conformations are funneled into a single active conformation as monitored at the intracellular probe Met138 3x46. NMR and structural evidence for active-state interactions between 3x46 and 7x53 suggest that the stringent intracellular conformational requirements comprise the intracellular regions of TM3 and TM7. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Indeed, although studies of AT1R bound to multiple b-arrestin agonists have revealed diverse intracellular conforma- tions, most variation was in TM5 and TM6, w i t ho n l ym o d e s tv a r i a t i o ni nT M 7( 14). Conformational control, although important, may not fully account for b-arrestin recruit- ment. The observation that intracellular and Kleist et al.,Science 377, 222 228 (2022) 8 July 2022 5o f7Fig. 4. Dynamic control ofb-arrestin recruit- ment to ACKR3. Alloste- ric regulation of GPCR b-arrestin activation by coordinated transitions in conformational heteroge- neity. Ligands constrain (agonists) or promote (antagonists) conforma- tional heterogeneity by altering intermolecular (ligand-residue) and intramolecular (residue- residue) interactions throughout the GPCR structure. RESEARCH |REPORT Downloaded from https://www.science.org at St. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 6, 'content': 'extracellular probes both transition between conformational heterogeneity (inactive) and homogeneity (active) suggests that b-arrestin recruitment is governed in part by tuning the conformational spectrum sampled by the re- ceptor. The regulation of b-arrestin recruit- ment in this manner could help to explain the apparent agnosticism of b-arrestin for specific GPCR conformations ( 14): Altera- tion of receptor stability in key regions may tune a GPCR s ability to couple b-arrestin ir- respective of conformation (e.g., at Met2125x39). Likewise, globally different GPCR confor- mations may be similarly tuned to coupleb-arrestins by decreasing conformational heterogeneity of the same key epitopes of the b-arrestin interface. Ligand-specific modulation of the confor- mational spectrum observed at NMR probes supports a role for conformational selection inb-arrestin recruitment. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 6, 'content': 'In this model, a pre- existing spectrum of conformations is nar- rowed upon perturbation of the system ( 44), in this case by addition of various ligands. In t h el i g a n d - b i n d i n gp o c k e t ,t h ei n a c t i v ec o n f o r - mation of M212 5x39is a composite of multiple active conformations, suggesting that b-arrestin recruitment is governed not by switching be- tween distinct on and off conformations, but rather by selecting one of many active con- formations (active) versus facilitating rapid exchange between them (inactive). The same is only partially true intracellularly: Met1383x46 exists as a composite of trans /gauche rotamers in the inactive state that is narrowed to gauche - only rotamers in the active state. Nevertheless, Met1383x46only experiences ring current shift effects in the active state. Although this might suggest that the active-state conformation of Met1383x46is not accessible to ACKR3 in the inactive state, it could also reflect sensitivity limitations of13C compared with other NMR nuclei ( 45). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 6, 'content': 'How might different ligands enhance or suppress changes in conformational plastic- ity to regulate b-arrestin? b-arrestin agonists might be described as stabilizing a particularset of conformations that facilitate b-arrestin binding (Fig. 4). Indeed, contact network anal- ysis of inactive- and active-state structures of GPCRs reveals enhanced intermolecular (ligand-residue) and intramolecular (residue- residue) interactions in b-arrestin active states, suggesting that b-arrestin agonists might sta- bilize specific conformations by organizing denser contact networks. Antagonists fail to fasten these locks, leaving them open (or con- formationally heterogeneous), which might disfavor b-arrestin recruitment (Fig. 4). Whereas NMR data and structural analysis point to the association of b-arrestin recruit- ment with increased stability, other studies show that G protein activation is associated with conformational heterogeneity at the intra-cellular region ( 46). There are several possible reasons for this difference. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Conformational selection guides β-arrestin recruitment at a biased G protein–coupled receptor', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Principally, com- pared with extensive GPCR G protein interface (mediated primarily through the a5-helix of G protein), GPCR- b-arrestin interactions are mediated by a smaller, less structured finger loop. Other reasons include dependence of Gp r o t e i n( b u tn o t b-arrestin) engagement on outward, destabilizing motions of TM6 (14,25), and requirement of G protein (but notb-arrestin) coupling to be linked to GTP hydrolysis. We propose roles for receptor conforma- tions and conformational equilibria in regulat-ingb-arrestin recruitment, but other aspects of b-arrestin coupling must also be considered. For instance, the observed conformational changes might lead to differences in GPCR kinase recruitment between antagonists and agonists, resulting in distinct phosphorylation patterns that alter GPCR functional properties (47). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34055-5 Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein couplingselectivity and promiscuity Manbir Sandhu1,2,A a r o nC h o3,N i n gM a1, Elizaveta Mukhaleva1,4, Yoon Namkung3, Sangbae Lee1, Soumadwip Ghosh1, John H. Lee1, David E. Gloriam5,S t  p h a n eA .L a p o r t e3,6,M .M a d a nB a b u2,7& Nagarajan Vaidehi1,4 Recent studies have shown that G prote in coupled receptors (GPCRs) show selective and promiscuous coupling to different G protein subfamilies and yet the mechanisms of the range of coupli ng preferences remain unclear. Here, we use Molecular Dynamics (MD) simu lations on ten GPCR:G protein com- plexes and show that the location (spati al) and duration (temporal) of inter- molecular contacts at the GPCR:G protein interface play a critical role in how GPCRs selectively interact with G pro teins. We identify that some GPCR:G protein interface contacts are common across G subfamilies and others speci ct oG subfamilies. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Using large scale data analysis techniques on the MD simulation snapshots we derive a spatio-temporal code for contacts that confer G protein selective coupling an d validated these contacts using G protein activation BRET assays. Our results demonstrate that promiscuousGPCRs show persistent sampling of the common contacts more than G protein speci cc o n t a c t s .T h e s e ndings suggest that GPCRs maintain contact with G proteins through a common central interface, while the selectivity comes fromGp r o t e i ns p e c i c contacts at the periph ery of the interface. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are membrane proteins that are critical in cell signaling. GPCRs play a pivotal role in intracellular communication and are highly tractable drug targets. GPCRs couple tothe heterotrimeric G protein family to transduce an extracellular signalinto various intracellular signaling cascades. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 1, 'content': 'The G subunit (G  s,Gi, Gq,G12/13) of the trimeric G proteins is used to characterize the major signaling pathways activated by a G protein. The preferred sig-naling pathway for several GPCRs has been annotated in the IUPHARGuide to Pharmacology database 1. Several recent studies212highlight that GPCRs are generally promiscuous in their coupling to different Gprotein subfamilies. Avet and colleagues have recently established that among 100 therapeutically relevant GPCRs, only 17 show selective signaling to one G protein subfamily12. For GPCRs that were formerly thought to signal through a single G protein subfamily, we nowappreciate that different ligands can in uence the same GPCR to signal through speci c G proteins within and across G protein subfamilies 10. Furthermore, certain pairs of GPCRs and G proteins that can bio-chemically coupled to each other can be limited by co-expression inspeci cc e l lt y p e s 1317. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 1, 'content': 'These factors collectively affect the inferred selectivity of a GPCR signaling response in vitro and in vivo.Received: 21 September 2020 Accepted: 11 October 2022 Check for updates 1Department of Computational and Quantitative Medicine, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.2Department of Structural Biology, Center for Data Driven Discovery, St. Jude Children s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.3Department of Medicine, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.4Irell and Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.5Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.6Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montral, QC H3G 1Y6, Canada.7MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'While extrinsic factors such as ligand identity and co-localization of a GPCR:G protein pair play a critical role in the signaling repertoireof a given GPCR, there are receptor-intrinsic structural factors that playa critical role in G protein coupling. Despite the explosion of high- resolution structures of GPCR and G protein co-complexes over the last decade 1830, we are still decoding the mechanisms and structural determinants that de ne how speci c GPCR:G protein complexes form. A G protein barcode for GPCR:G protein selective coupling has been identi ed14by analyzing the amino acid sequence of G protein residues that form contacts with GPCR residues in the interface22,28,29. A tt h es a m et i m e ,t h e s es t u d i e sh a v ea l s oh i g h l i g h t e dt h ed i f culty of deriving complementary determinants in the GPCR interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Analysisof static structures and sequence information re ects that GPCRs have not evolved consensus sequences for recognizing G proteins 14,22.M o r e importantly, there is a paucity in the information on the structural dynamics mechanisms by which GPCRs promiscuously couple to multiple G proteins14,31. We postulate that the temporal persistence of the GPCR:G protein contacts are a paramount factor in G protein selectivity and pro-miscuity. The persistence of the GPCR:G protein residue contacts inthe interface is in uenced by the environment of residues in the neighborhood of these contacts. This persistence of the contacts iscritical to determining the overall lifetime or the stability of theGPCR:G protein complex 32. Given that the period of the vibrational modes of the GPCR:G protein non-bonded contacts (van der Waals andhydrogen bonds) is in the picosecond range, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is a suitable method to probe the persistence of these contacts in lipid membrane bilayer and solvent environments. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'In this study, we use atomistic MD simulations for 10 class A GPCR:G protein complexes that span both selective and promiscuousGPCRs and G  s,Gi,a n dG qprotein subfamilies. We generate a map for the spatio-temporal persistence of GPCR:G protein inter- molecular residue contacts and identify two critical types of GPCR:G  protein contacts: those that are persistent (sampled >20% frequency inthe simulation) and (a) speci ct oe a c hG protein subfamily, which we name as subfamily-speci c contacts and (b) common among com- plexes from all G protein subfamilies (G  s,Gi,Gq), labeled as common contacts . We applied data analysis techniques on 6 GPCR:G protein contacts to generate a spatio-temporal code for G protein selectivity and validated the code on 3 GPCR:G protein com-plexes not used in the training. The GPCR:G protein contacts that are important for selective coupling consist not only of the subfamily-speci c but also some common contacts. The common contacts contribute to selectivity through differences in temporal persistenceamong GPCR:G protein residue contacts from different G proteinsubfamilies. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'All GPCRs sample the common contacts with higher per-sistence than the speci c contacts, particularly the promiscuous triple mutant 332-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), which is the tenth GPCR:G protein compelx we have simulated. We validated our spatio-temporal code regulation by introducing switching mutations in the Gq-coupledmuscarinic receptor M1 (CHRM1) to facilitate its coupling to the sec-ondary G proteins, Gi and Gs using BRET-based assays. Results GPCRs exhibit a spectrum of coupling preference to G proteins Recent work by Inoue et al.11a n dA v e te ta l .12have used biochemical and FRET-based experimental techniques to measure the pluri-dimensional coupling repertoire of GPCRs to multiple G protein subtypes. The data generated by Inoue and colleagues was recentlypublished in combination with existing data from the IUPHAR Guide to Pharmacology database on the GPCRdb website 34,35. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'This data summarizes G protein coupling for the available GPCRs into catego-rical rankings for no coupling ,secondary coupling ,a n d primary coupling. We have similarly categorized (see Methods )t h em e a - sured coupling data provided in Table S1D: double normalized E maxvalues from the Avet et al. study to consolidate GPCR:G protein coupling information across these three resources36. The experimental methods used by Avet et al. directly measure activation of G proteins, whereas the signal measured in the Inoue study undergoes ampli cation between the initia l receptor:transducer coupling event to the measured biochemical outcome. Moreover, theInoue et al. study used a chimeric Gq protein in which the last sixC-terminal amino acids were substituted for different G proteinsequences to test coupling of GPCRs to these chimeric Gq proteins,rather than the wildtype G proteins. For this reason, we assigned dif-ferent weights to the categories describing binding from these twostudies and the Guide to Pharmacology resource (see Methods ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Among 404 non-olfactory class A GPCRs, G protein coupling infor-mation was available for 267 receptors across these three datasets. Thenumber of distinct G protein subtypes measured also differed between datasets and in the Guide to Pharmacology resource, G protein coupling was only provided as categorical descriptions for the fourmajor G protein subfamilies. Therefore, we generated a compositescore describing the G protein coupling repertoire for these 267receptors for each of the 4 G protein subfamilies (see Methods ). We combined these scores across the four subfamilies to generate anaverage promiscuity index (Supplementary Data 1). The results of this promiscuity index are summarized in the heatmap in Fig. 1to show both the strength of the evidence for coupling and the promiscuity ofcoupling for 267 GPCRs. Our analysis shows GPCRs exhibit a spectrum of coupling beha- vior towards G proteins ranging from selectivity to a single G protein subfamily (e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'ADGRG2 (G q), FZD10 (G 12/13), and P2RY12 (G i)r e c e p - tors) to promiscuous coupling to multiple G protein subfamily members (e.g. LPAR1 (G i,Gq,G12/13), LPAR2 (G s,Gi,Gq), BDKRB2 (G s,Gi, Gq,G 12/13), GPPR4 (G s,G i,G q,G 12/13), GPR68 (G s,G i,G q,G 12/13) receptors). Here we study the role of structural and dynamic factors that contribute to the selective and promiscuous coupling of G proteins byGPCRs. The need for understanding dynamic factors of selectivitybecome evident when comparing the three-dimensional structures ofdifferent GPCRs coupled to the same G protein subfamily. Comparison of the orientation of the C-terminal 5 helix of G  s,Gi,a n dG q proteins in their respective GPCR:G protein complexes show an ensemble of different orientations for the 5 helix as it inserts into the GPCR intracellular cavity (Supplementary Fig. 1a c). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Even for a single GPCR such as NTS 1R, multiple binding conformations for the same G  protein have been observed within cryo-EM structures37,38and may hint at a conformation ensemble modulating the signaling outputthrough the Gi protein (Supplementary Fig. 1d). This highlights theimportance of considering the dynamics of intermolecular contacts inthe GPCR:G protein interface to understand the mechanisms ofrecognition of G proteins by GPCRs. Structural dynamics reveals GPCR:G protein contacts that are speci c and common across G protein subfamilies We performed molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of GPCR:G pro- tein complexes in lipid bilayer to understand how the persistence ofthe intermolecular contacts between GPCR and G protein residuescontribute to G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity. Thecomputational work ow is shown in Fig. 2.W ec o m b i n e dM Ds i m u l a - tion trajectories and data analysis techniques to map the location andduration of the GPCR:G protein intermolecular contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 2, 'content': 'We per- formed 800 ns 1s of MD simulations on each of the ve replicates for each of the 6 GPCR:G protein complexes used for training the model (complex, PDB IDs: ADRB2:Gs, 3SN6; ADORA2A:miniGs, 6GDG; ADORA1:Gi2, 6D9H; HTR1B:Go1, 6G79; CHRM1:G14, 6OIJ; HTR2A:mi-niGq, 6WHA), starting from their respective X-ray or electron micro-scopy resolved structures (Fig. 2a). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 3, 'content': 'totaling 1 s of simulation time. Within this 1 s ensemble, we calcu- lated all sidechain-to-sidechain contacts between the GPCR and G  subunit of the G protein using the getcontacts python script39 (Fig. 2b). Each pairwise residue contact from GPCR to G protein was labeled based on GPCRdb numbering scheme40and Common G pro- tein Numbering41. We focused on non-covalent contacts between sidechain atoms to analyze the effect of speci c protein sequences. This framework allows for interpreting the residue contact pairs from aspatial, temporal, and chemical perspective. We did not consider residue contacts that were formed by regions of the GPCR that were not represented in every complex (Gs, Gi, Gq  see Methods ). This resulted in 764 total pairwise contacts for further analysis (Supplementary Data 2, Fig. 2c). Out of the 764 contacts we analyzed the contacts that showed a persistence of >20% of thesimulation time, which represents a duration of at least 40 200 nanoseconds. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 3, 'content': 'The persistent contacts that were observed only ininteractions with a speci c subfamily of G proteins are termed assubfamily speci cc o n t a c t s . We identi ed 24 such contacts for Gs, 13 contacts for Gi, and 18 contacts for Gq (Supplementary Fig. 2a c). The persistent residue contacts observed in all G protein subfamilies are termed as common contacts and we identi ed 23 such contacts (Fig. 3c and further below). We identi ed distinct trends when evaluating which secondary structural elements (SSE) of GPCRs and G proteins contribute to thecommon and subfamily speci c contacts. Each pie chart denotes the percentage of contacts coming from different SSEs of the GPCRs and Gproteins for subfamily speci c (Supplementary Data 3, Fig. 3a, b) and common contacts (Fig. 3d). Gs-coupling GPCRs involve fewer SSEs to interface with G proteins than Gi-coupling and Gq-coupling GPCRs. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 3, 'content': 'In contrast, the G sproteins interface with their GPCR partners through a much larger and diverse set of SSEs compared to G iand G qproteins in complex with their GPCR partners. The GPCR residues contributing to the Gs subfamily speci c contacts (in ADRB2 and ADORA2A) are often found in transmembrane Fig. 1 | GPCRs exhibit a spectrum of coupling strength to G-proteins; from selective interaction with a single G protein to promiscuous coupling across Gprotein subfamilies. GPCRs studied in Inoue et al. 11a n dA v e te ta l .12along with those annotated in the IUPHAR database were compared to assess GPCR coupling selectivity across major G protein subfamilies. We calculated a promiscuity index and ranked GPCRs based on this index, taking into consideration the strength of evidence for coupling based on the type of assay or reporting used. The circular-ized bar plot displays the spectrum of promiscuity as denoted by the color heatmapat the right of the gure. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'helix 5 (TM5) (58.3%), followed by ICL2 (25%), then similarly from TM3 and Helix 8 (H8) (8.3% each). The G sresidues involved in subfamily speci c contacts arise predominantly from the C-terminal 5 helix (H5) (50%) and the remainder from several small loops, helices, and beta- sheets within the G protein alpha-helical domain. Gi interactions are marked by a large GPCR interface with roughly similar contributionsfrom several SSEs: ICL1, TM2, TM5, TM6 (7.7% each); ICL2, TM7, H8(15.4% each); TM3 (23.1%). Like G  s, most subfamily speci c contacts formed by G iarise from H5 (76.9%), with a few interactions fromnearby loops h3s5 and s2s3 and beta-sheet S3 (7.7% each). The GPCR residues involved in Gq subfamily speci c contacts are primarily located in TM2 (33.3%) and ICL2 (27.8%), with a few residues from TM3(5.6%), TM4, TM6, and H8 (11.1% each). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'The G  qprotein also con- tributes to a large percentage of contacts using H5 (72.2%), with few interactions arising from key loops, hns1 (16.7%) and s2s3 (11.1%). There are 23 common contacts sampled with different temporal frequencies observed across G protein subfamilies (Fig. 3c). Sequence alignment of the GPCR and G protein residues found a high degree ofconservation of residues forming the common contacts at thesep o s i t i o n sa c r o s st h e6G P C R sa n d5 Gp r o t e i n su s e di nt h i ss t u d y(Supplementary Fig. 2d e). Most residues contributing to common contacts are found in ICL2 (43.5%), TM3 (21.7%), and TM6 (17.4%) ofGPCRs and H5 of G proteins (87%) (Fig. 3d). It should be noted that although these common contacts would have been discounted as not contributing to G protein selectivity based on sequence analysis, we show in the next section that they indeed do so by modulating theirtemporal frequencies of these contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Deriving the spatiotemporal code for G protein selectivity by GPCRs To identify the GPCR:G protein residue contacts that confer selectivity to G protein coupling, we performed the data analysis procedureshown in Fig. 4a. The 764 intermolecular contacts from each trajectory were accumulated into a binary dataset by one-hot encoding the var-ious contacts as features (columns) of the dataset, and the rows being each frame of the trajectory. Within each row, if a particular contact is present within that frame, the feature is noted by a 1,a n di fa b s e n ti t is marked as 0.T h u s ,t h i sb i n a r yd a t a s e td e l i v e r sa ngerprint of contacts for each frame of the trajectory (Supplementary Data 2). Each row of the dataset is assigned a class value of Gs(for frames of the ADRB2:Gs and ADORA2A:miniGs simulations), Gi(for frames of the ADORA1:Gi2 and HTR1B:Go1 simulations), or Gq(for frames of the CHRM1:G11 and HTR2A:miniGq simulations), depending on whichsimulation the row represents. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'By segregating rows into the appro-priate classes, we performed a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) toidentify a singular value decomposition of the contact space that segregates each class from one another (Fig. 4a ) .W et r a i n e dt h eL D A classi er using the entirety of the contact ngerprint dataset from the six simulations (Fig. 4b) and have shared the resulting outputs from the model (Supplementary Data 4 8). We used the LDA classi er as a feature ranking method to deter- mine which contacts contribute most prominently for the distinctinteraction signature of different GPCR:G protein complexes. We used the composite weight computed in Supplementary Data 5 ( wGx  values) to identify the top 10 contacts for each class of G proteininteractions which we have denoted as the Spatiotemporal code for selectivity. These G protein selectivity contacts are provided in a matrix (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Data 6) with GPCR residues on the vertical axis and G protein residues on the horizontal axis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'For each ofthese contacts, we have also enumerated which contacts wereobserved in the three-dimensional structures used for starting the MDsimulations, and which, if any, residues are missing from the originalPDBles (Supplementary Data 6). Each square is colored to represent the G protein class (Gs in red, Gi in green, Gq in blue). 13 of 30 selec-tivity code contacts are from the set of common contacts identi ed earlier, with 5 in the Gs spatiotemporal code, 4 in Gi, and 4 in Gq. Weobserve that 12 out of 30 contacts in the spatiotemporal code belongto the subfamily speci c contacts with two contacts identi ed in Gs, 4 in Gi, and 6 in Gq. The remaining contacts found in the code (5 of 30) are sampled highly in more than one subfamily, but not across all three G protein subfamilies. We do observe one distinct residue contact pairthat has been identi ed as both Gi and Gq selective, 35 3 and G.H5.19 (cyan square, Fig. 4b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'This contact is ranked higher in the Gi class and is sampled at a higher frequency in the Gi-coupled complexes 2324 13 18 GqGs Gia bModel & Simulate GPCR:G proteincomplexes(5x800ns) Gs-bound: 2 ADRB2 (3SN6)ADORA2A (6GDG) Gi-bound: 2 ADORA1 (6D9H) HTR1B (6G79) Gq-bound: 2 CHRM1 (6OIJ)HTR2A (6WHA) Compute  Intermolecular Contacts across trajectories (sidechain-to-sidechain) Persistent contacts (>20%) Gs-specific: 24Gi-specific: 13 Gq-specific: 18 Common: 23 Fig. 2 | Work ow for extracting the spatiotemporal heat map for the residue contacts in GPCR:G protein interface. a We used six crystal and cryo-EM struc- tures of GPCR:G protein complexes to model the interactions of two Gs-coupled, two Gi-coupled, and two Gq-coupled GPCR:G protein pairs. Atomistic MD simula- tions were performed as ve replicates, each replicate extended to >800 ns of simulation time for each of these GPCR:G protein complexes. The last 200 ns window of each replicate was combined into a 1 s ensemble trajectory used for further analysis. Source data are hosted at GPCRmd.org. bThe sidechain-to- sidechain intermolecular contacts between GPCR and G proteins were computed for each of the six complexes using the get_contacts.py method. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 4, 'content': 'We obtained 764 contacts for analysis and identi edpersistent contacts as those sampled for >20% frequency in one or both systems representing each class (Gs, Gi, Gq). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 5, 'content': 'than the Gq-coupled complexes showing that temporal frequency of the GPCR:G protein contacts may also play a critical role in selectivity. For the Gs-selective LDA contacts, 5 of the 10 contacts are formed within the original PDBs of either ADRB2 (PDB 3SN6) or ADORA2A(PDB 6GDG). Those contacts are samp led at frequencies of 23.9-99.6% of the simulation duration, while the contacts newly formed within the simulation are sampled at frequencies of 9.8 93.4% of the simulation. For Gi-selective LDA contacts, 4 of the 10 contacts are found within oneor both original PDB structures for ADORA1 (PDB 6D9H) or HTR1B(6G79). Those contacts are sampled at frequencies of 29.5 65.4% ofthe simulation, while newly formed contacts are sampled at 17.1 96.1% of simulation duration. Among these Gi selective contacts, the residue5  71 was missing from the HTR1B PDB le. For Gq-selective LDA contacts, 2 of the 10 contacts were found within the PDB structures ofCHRM1 (PDB 6OIJ) and HTR2A (PDB 6WHA). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Those contacts are sam- pled at frequencies of 70.0% and 89.1% of the simulations, and the newly formed contacts are sampled at frequencies ranging from 25.9%to 89.2% of the simulation. To identify the structural location of selective contacts in the spatiotemporal code matrix, we mapped the GPCR residues (colored Fig. 3 | Unique signatures of GPCR and G protein structural regions involved in contacts from different G protein families. The location of the G protein family speci c contacts mapped to the various GPCR and G protein secondary structural elements (SSE). Source data for all plots are provided as Supplementary Data 2. aThe percentage of GPCR:G protein contacts speci c to the Gs (left), Gi (center), and Gq (right) interaction arising from each SSE of the GPCR is shown. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 5, 'content': 'bSimilar pie chart displaying the percentage of contacts from speci cS S E so ft h eGp r o t e i n s .The residue numbering system used is from the common G protein numbering  scheme developed by Flock et al.41.cThe temporal frequency of each GPCR:G protein common contact is displayed, indicating the frequency of each contact for each GPCR system. dThe amino acids found among common contacts are shown in the pie charts, labeled by the SSE in which they are found. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 6, 'content': 'and labeled spheres) from contacts found in the spatiotemporal code onto the structure of a representative GPCR from the set of simulatedreceptors (Fig. 4d). We nd that GPCR residues involved in selective G protein binding are found predominantly at the periphery of the intracellular surface while those contacts common to all G protein subfamilies (light-pink colored surface) are found at the central core ofthe GPCR surface, spanning a vertical interface from TM6 to ICL2. This representation shows clearly that GPCR residues involved incommon contacts are in a highly conserved interface across GPCRswith varied G protein coupling preferences and the sequence identity of these positions is highly conserved among the GPCRs used in thisstudy (Supplementary Fig. 2d). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Experimental validation of residue positions in the spatio-temporal code tha t modulate selectivity to cognate and non-cognate G proteins in CHRM1 We tested the importance of the residue positions identi ed in the spatio-temporal code in their ability to modulate selective G protein Component 1Component 2bac 7x55 8x48 5x68 3x54 34x50 34x51 34x53 34x54ADRB2 5x71 x71ADORA1 5x68 5x61 3x5312x498x496x327x56 8x47 2x39 3x53 34x53 34x55 34x574x384x396x328x48HTR2A f ed g R218Q5x68 (Gs GOF) L131F34x51 (Gs GOF)CHRM1 WT P139K4x39 (Gq LOF) S126A3x53 (Gq LOF)E221K5x71 (Gi GOF) A424K8x49 (Gi GOF)- 1 0 - 8- 6- 4- 2 0-50050100150 Carbachol (logM)Gq Activation (%WT) -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0-50050100150 Carbachol (logM)Gi Activation (%WT) - 1 0 - 8- 6- 4- 2 0-50050100150200 Carbachol (logM)Gs Activation (%WT) CHRM1 WT CHRM1 WTAnalyze 764 contacts to identify top-10 contacts for class (Gs, Gi, Gq)separation in Linear Discriminant AnalysisGenerate Spatio-Temporal selectivity code for Gs v Gi v Gqdistinguishing interactionsG protein residues GPCR residuesArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34055-5 Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:7428 6', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'coupling. We used the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1 (CHRM1) as our test case to determine if modifying the amino acidsat selectivity positions identi ed for Gs, Gi, and Gq interactions could change the behavior of CHRM1-mediated G protein activa-tion. We prioritized contacts from the spatiotemporal code thatwere identi ed from G protein family-speci c contacts, where amino acid identity was not conserved in receptors with couplingpreference to other G proteins. We mutated residues in the CHRM1to amino acids found at those same positions in either the ADRB2,HTR1B, or ADORA1 receptors. To disrupt interaction with the cognate Gq protein, we mutated Gq-selective residue positions 439 and 353 in CHRM1 to theiramino acid identities in ADRB2; P139K 439and S126A353. Both of these mutants show a signi cant right-shift in the EC 50curve for carbachol- mediated CHRM1 activation of Gq (Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': '4e), demonstrating a loss in potency for Gq activation (logM of 5.851 to 5.351; p-value = 0.0011**, and to 5.595; p-value = 0.0117*, respectively). We enhanced the activity of the CHRM1 to activate Gi protein by intro-ducing swapping mutations at the predicted Gi-selective positions571 and 849 with the corresponding amino acids from HTR1B andADORA1, respectively. Both the mutants E221K 571and A424K849 improved potency of Gi activation by shifting the EC 50of carbachol- mediated CHRM1 activation of Gi from logM of 4.025 to 5.374 ( p- value = 0.0007***) and to 5.428 ( p-value = 0.0004***), respectively (Fig. 4f). These mutants also signi cantly increased the Emax of CHRM1 activation of Gi by 30% ( p-value = 0.0132*) and 31% ( p- value = 0.0113*) compared to WT CHRM1. Finally, we modi ed Gs- selective residue positions R218568and L1313451to the corresponding amino acids in ADRB2 to enhance coupling of CHRM1 with Gs pro-tein. Because CHRM1 inef ciently engaged the Gs BRET sensor 12,w e used the downstream EPAC-BRET sensor42to measure cAMP pro- duction by CHRM1 and mutants. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'We also included an inhibitor of Gq protein, YM-254890, to ensure that Gs-dependent cAMP accumula- tion was independent on Gq and Ca2+cross-talk. Both mutants demonstrated a signi cant increase in the Emax of Gs-dependent cAMP production following carbachol treatment (17% ( p-value = 0.0242*) for R218Q and 51% ( p-value = 0.0022**) for L131F; Fig. 4g). None of these substitutions signi cantly altered mutants expression as compared to WT CHRM1 (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Residue positions in the spatio-temporal code show lower propensity for natural variation To validate the functional importance of these LDA-derived spatio- temporal code residue positions, we calculated the mean variation of all residue positions identi ed as missense variants in the gnomAD v3.1 population database43for the six GPCRs studied here. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'We com- pared the average number of variants per residue position identi ed among the gnomAD population at positions that are part of the LDA-derived spatiotemporal code for the given receptor, and thosepositions not found in the code. We observe that GPCR residues within the LDA spatiotemporal code show lower variation in thepopulation, suggesting that these positions are likely under selectivepressure (Supplementary Fig. 3b, Supplementary Data 8). This pointsto the functional role of the spatiotemporal code residue positionsthat are in the GPCR:G protein interface compared to other interfaceresidues. We further validated the importance of the LDA-derived contacts by analyzing the measured effect of mutations on the GPCR residuepositions generated using deep mutational scanning measurements by Jones et al. 44that examined the role of every amino acid substitution on ADRB2. The authors use a barcoded (DNA sequence) transcriptionalreporter that measures Gs-signaling output through a multimericcAMP response element that transcribes the unique barcode. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Theauthors mutated each amino acid position of the ADRB2 to each of the19 alternate amino acids and measured signaling activity via the tran-scriptional reporter at basal (non-stimulated), 150 nM (EC 50dose), 625 nM (EC 100dose), and 5 m (saturating dose) concentrations of isoproterenol. We examined the normalized activity for all mutantsglobally to be 1.75 activity units which suggest an overall high level of mutational tolerance at most positions and substitutions. We observe that the ADRB2 residue positions found in the spatiotemporal code for Gs-selectivity are well below the global average mutant activity. Mostp o s i t i o n s( 3 45 0 ,3 45 3 ,3 45 4 ,56 8 ,75 5 )w e r em e a s u r e db e l o w1.0 activity units (Supplementary Fig. 3c). These results demonstratethat ADRB2 residue positions found among Gs-selectivity conferringcontacts are intolerant to mutation, and can strongly affect Gssignaling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'Test set of GPCR:G protein complexes further validate the spatio-temporal code Lastly, we determined how well the LDA model can identify contacts for a test set of simulations performed for the Gs-coupled Dopamine D1 Receptor (D1DR), Gi-coupled Cannabinoid 1 Receptor (CB1R), andGq-coupled Histamine H1 Receptor (HRH1) (SupplementaryFigs. 4d f). These receptor complexes were not included in the six GPCR:G protein complexes used for the derivation of the spatio-temporal code. We observe that simulation snapshots project ontosimilar space in the LDA Component 1 and Component 2 vectors,with the Gs-coupled DRD1 aligning best with the Gs class of contacts(Supplementary Fig. 3d). The CB1R and HRH1 simulations alignedprominently with their Gi-coupled and Gq-coupled contacts,respectively, but we also observe overlap into other G protein classes(Supplementary Fig. 3e f). This overlap may correspond to the more promiscuous nature of CB1R and HRH1 receptors, as demonstrated in the promiscuity index (Fig. 1). In addition, predictive models based on methods such as LDA can be re ned as more structures of GPCRs with full length, non-chimeric G proteins become available in thefuture.Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': '4 | Identifying G protein selectivity determinants using linear discriminant analysis of spatiotemporally resolved GPCR:G protein contacts. a GPCR:G  protein contacts from each frame of the MD simulations were one-hot encoded intoa binarized interaction ngerprint and used to train a linear discriminant classi er and identify features (intermolecular contact pairs) that distinguish Gs, Gi, and Gq interactions. bThe projection of each frame of the MD simulations, colored by G protein interaction (red, Gs; green, Gi; blue, Gq) are shown projected into the two-dimensional deconvoluted space (Component 1, Component 2) determined by the linear discriminant analysis. Source data are provided as Supplementary Data 4. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'cThe top ten pairwise contacts which contribute highly to the interaction signature of each G protein family are displayed in the spatio-temporal barcode as the GPCR(rows) and G protein (columns) residues that are found in the distinguishing pairwise contacts for each G protein interaction (red, Gs; green, Gi; blue, Gq). One contact ( 353:G.H5.19 ) is shared among Gi and Gq type interactions, and is colored incyan. dGPCR residues involved in G protein selectivity are displayed on theintracellular surface of a Gs (ADRB2, red spheres, left), Gi (ADORA1, green spheres, center), and Gq-coupled (HTR2A, blue spheres, right) GPCR. Residues that are found in common contacts across G protein subfamilies are shown as a magenta- colored surface. eBRET-based Gq-activation sensor was used to measure CHRM1 (WT, P139K and S126A mutants) activation of Gq heterotrimers in the presence of carbachol ( n= 3 biologically independent samples, data are presented as mean  SD for each concentration). fBRET-based Gi-activation sensor was used to measure CHRM1 (WT, E221K, and A424K mutants) activation of Gi heterotrimers in the presence of carbachol (n = 3 biologically independent samples, data are presented as mean  SD for each concentration). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 7, 'content': 'gBRET-based EPAC sensor was used to measure CHRM1 (WT, P139K and S126A mutants) activation of Gs signaling andcAMP accumulation in the presence of carbachol and 500 nM of Gq-protein inhi- bitor YM-254890 ( n= 3 biologically independent samples, data are presented as mean  SD for each concentration).Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34055-5 Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:7428 7', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Promiscuous GPCRs sample more of the common contacts than G protein subfamily-speci c contacts In our previous study of the structural dynamics of promiscuous receptors, we showed that GPCRs have latent intracellular cavities thatcan be engineered to reshape and signal through multiple G proteins 33. We used this engineered Q142K3454-R228I567-Q229W568triple-mutant of ADRB2, denoted as ADRB2-TM, which is promiscuous to Gs and Gqcoupling with relatively similar potency 33, to perform MD simulations with both the Gs and Gq protein heterotrimers. We analyzed how thesecontacts compared to the signature identi ed from the less- promiscuous GPCRs used in our LDA classi er. We projected the n- gerprints from the ADRB2-TM:Gs complex onto our LDA space (Fig. 5a, magenta circles) and observe that these ngerprints do not segregate completely with the Gssignature (red circles). In fact, there is suf - cient sampling of the 2D space representing the Gqand Gisig- natures. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'We tested the ability of our LDA classi er to sort the ADRB2-TM:Gs ngerprints into the correct class ( Gs) and observe an accu- racy of 57.41%. The ADRB2-TM:Gs ngerprints when tested for sorting into class of Gq, the accuracy of the classi er was 30.92%. These results suggest that the promiscuous ADRB2-TM may sample con-formation features that represent both Gsand Gqtypes of inter- actions and is able to accommodate the Gs protein in both types of interfaces. We also tested how well the ADRB2-TM:Gq complexrepresents a Gqspeci c signature and projected the ngerprints of this simulation onto the LDA space (Fig. 5a, cyan circles). We similarly observe that these ngerprints do not segregate with the Gqsig- nature, and when we tested the LDA classi er, we observed only a 3.77% accuracy assigning these ngerprints to the Gqclass. Surpris- ingly, when testing the classi er to sort into the Gsclass, the accuracy rose to 84.94%. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'From evaluating the contact frequencies of theseADRB2-TM simulations we identi ed a strong preference for each complex to sample the subset of common contacts (Fig. 5b). To understand further why the promiscuous ADRB2-TM simula- tions poorly segregate with the Gsand Gqsignatures we tradi- tionally expect, we analyzed how each GPCR samples common andsubfamily speci c contacts in each simulation. We computed the mean frequency per residue for residues from the subset of common con- tacts and G protein subfamily speci ccontacts for each of the eight GPCR:G protein simulations shown in Fig. 5c (six original simulations from the LDA model and two simulations of the promiscuous ADRB2-TM with Gs and Gq proteins). We also calculated the contribution oft h ec o m m o na n ds p e c i c contacts to the GPCR:G protein non-bonded interaction energies averaged over the MD trajectories (Supplemen- tary Fig. 3g). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Surprisingly, we observe that all the GPCR:G protein complexes studied show on average a higher frequency or duration ofcontact (~45 65%) within the common subset as compared to the G protein-speci cs u b s e t( ~ 5 55%) (Fig. 5c). Most of these receptors also show a similar trend with the calculated average interaction energiesfor these contacts (Supplementary Fig. 3g). We observe that the ratioof the mean frequency for common versus speci c contacts is most prominent for the two promiscuous receptor simulations, ADRB2-TM:Gs and ADRB2-TM:Gq. Because both ADRB2-TM simulationsshowed higher than expected sorting into their alternative classes withthe LDA classi er, we also evaluated the mean frequency of sampling for the alternative G protein subfamily speci c contacts (ADRB2-TM:Gs sampling of Gq-speci c contacts, and ADRB2-TM:Gq sampling of Gs- speci c contacts). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'We observe that ADRB2-TM:Gs samples very little of the Gq-speci c contact space, while the ADRB2-TM:Gq complex indeed is able to sample more Gs-speci c contacts than Gq-specifc contacts, but still at a much lower mean frequency than common Component 1 1.0 ADRB2-TM:GsADRB2-TM:Gq7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 -2.5-5.0 -7.5 7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 -2.5 -5.0 -7.5 10.0 -10.0Component 2 ADRB2-TM:Gs Gq-contactsADRB2-TM:Gq Gs-contactsADRB2ADORA2A ADRB2-TM:GsADORA1HTR1B CHRM1 HTR2A ADRB2-TM:Gq ReceptorMean Frequenciescommon specifica b cFig. 5 | The GPCR:G protein contact landscape of promiscuous GPCRs. a Analysis of promiscuous GPCRs in the framework of the LDA model trained on data from the original six structurally resolved GPCR:G protein complexes. The promiscuousGPCR:G protein interactions are plotted using the feature weightings used tocompute Component 1 and Component 2 from the LDA analysis performed in Fig.4. The promiscuous GPCRs are distinguished by color and denoted in the l e g e n d :A D R B 2 - T Mw i t hG s( B2TMs , magenta), ADRB2-TM with Gq ( B2TMq , cyan). The plotting of these promiscuous receptor interactions lie predominantly in the common space of the LDA model, suggesting the promiscuous receptor interactions with G proteins are represented by mostly non-distinguishing con-tacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 8, 'content': 'bHeatmap of contact frequencies for common contacts sampled in the promiscuous ADRB2-TM receptor. Source data are provided as Supplementary Data 3. cThe promiscuous GPCRs studied here show stronger sampling (measured by mean frequency per residue) within the subspace of common contacts pairs (light gray), and less frequent sampling of G protein family speci cc o n t a c t pairs sampled within the G protein family to which they are coupled (medium gray). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'contacts. We expanded this analysis to compare the sampling of common contacts compared to any other contacts sampled withineach class (Supplementary Fig. 3h). From this analysis, we still observea much higher mean frequency of interaction through the common contacts (~45 65%) as compared to other contacts (~30 50%) sampled for each GPCR:G protein class. Interestingly, as seen in SupplementaryFig. 3b, the interaction energies coming from both common and spe-cic contacts are similar in magnitude in the eight receptors studied here except in HT2A and in the promiscuous receptor ADRB2-TM. Thissuggests that promiscuous GPCRs sample more of the common con-tacts and likely derive their coupling strength from them more thanthe speci cc o n t a c t s . Discussion We put these results forward as a model for selective and promiscuous GPCR:G protein coupling; promiscuous GPCRs can readily interface multiple G proteins using residues at the core of the GPCR intracellularsurface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Selective GPCRs likely engage cognate G proteins through thecommon contacts and further stabilize the complex by formingselectivity conferring contacts located at the periphery of the GPCR:Gprotein interface. Our analysis of experimental G protein coupling data 11showed that GPCRs exhibit a continuous spectrum of coupling strengths toseveral G proteins, ranging from promiscuity across all four sub-families (G  s,Gi,Gq,a n dG 12/13) to highly selective coupling of single G protein subtypes. We nd that there is no preference for GPCRs within a given receptor family to either be G protein selective or promiscuous. This suggests that the GPCR intracellular surface main-tains a level of plasticity to evolve in either direction, i.e., towardsselectivity or promiscuity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Analysis of the detailed spatiotemporal resolution of contacts derived from the dynamics of 6 GPCR:G protein complexes showedtwo important types of persistent contacts: (i) those that are G proteinsubfamily-speci c and (ii) contacts that are common across G protein subfamilies. Linear Discriminant Analysis of all sampled contacts yiel-ded the spatiotemporal code for G protein selectivity. The contacts that contribute to G protein selectivity are in the periphery of the intracellular surface in the G  s,Giand G qcoupled receptors. Several of the common contacts also contribute to G protein selectivity bydifferentially modulating the temporal frequency of the contact tocouple members of different G protein subfamilies. We propose thatfor GPCR:G protein complexes, these common contacts must besatised for the interface of the complex to further stabilize and pro- long the GPCR:G protein complex lifetime, aiding in G protein activa-tion. Previously, differential evolution analysis of paralogous andorthologous G protein sequences identi ed a G protein-based barcode for selectivity 14,41. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Similar approaches have been applied to GPCRs, focusing on interfacial residues identi ed from three-dimensional structures of GPCR:G protein complexes. Identifying such a selectiv- itybar code based on consensus sequence has proven intractable, as GPCRs are more divergent in sequence than the G proteins14,45.T h i s exempli es the importance of both spatial and temporal properties of GPCR:G protein contacts playing an important role in G proteinselectivity. When performing experimental validation of the contacts identi- ed from the spatio-temporal dynamics of GPCR:G protein complexes, we were concerned that single point mutations would have relativelysmall effects on coupling behavior within the large interface of theGPCR:G protein complex. Therefore, we focused on identifying Gprotein family speci c contacts that were made by GPCR residues that were conserved among the two receptors within each G protein cou- pling class, but varied in the other receptors that couple to different Gproteins (i.e. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'positions where residues are conserved in ADRB2 andADORA2A, but vary in ADORA1, HTR1B, CHRM1, and/or HTR2A).Through this approach, we were able to identify positions andsubstitutions in the Gq-coupled CHRM1 receptor that were able to decrease interaction with its primary cognate Gq protein and enhanceinteractions with secondary G proteins, Gs and Gi proteins. In developing an LDA model of the GPCR:G protein residue con- tact space for Gs, Gi, and Gq, we believe that the availability of more simulation data from newly emerging GPCR:G protein complexstructures can be continuously used to re ne the boundaries between G protein classes. We observe that the D1DR:Gs data have strongercorrelation to the Gs class sampled in the original LDA model andsuspect this is because the Gs interaction may be highly similar acrossGs-coupling receptors. The CB1R:Gi and H1HR:Gq show less correla-tion to their respective Gi and Gq classes from the original LDA modeland in fact show strong correlation with Gq and Gi classes, respec-tively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'In cryo-EM structures, we observe that the orientation of the Gprotein 5 helix are aligned in similar orientations for the Gi and Gq proteins complexed to their respective receptors. Because of these similarities, we suspect the conformational space of Gi and Gq coupledinteractions may have similarities. Therefore, predictive models willbene t from re nements incorporating more structural models of each of these coupling interactions, especially using non-chimeric Gprotein sequences, as they become available. Although promiscuous coupling of G proteins by GPCRs has been known it has been largely underappreciated. Our recent study pre-dicted mutations in ADRB2 that enable it to couple and signal via G  s and G qproteins with similar potency when stimulated by isoproterenol33.W ei d e n t i ed that ADRB2 residue Q2295X68forms a strong contact with G sresidue Q384H5.16. This contact pair is a com- mon contact with particularly high frequency among Gs signalingcomplexes in our ngerprint dataset. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'We also observed a steric clash between the G  qresidue H5.22 (E355) and the ICL1/ICL2 regions of ADRB2. In that study, we mutated the ADRB2 568 position to tryp-tophan (Q229W) and the 3454 position to lysine (Q142K) to mimic theinterface chemistry found in the G  qcoupled Vasopressin 1 A Recep- tor. We showed this mutant became more amenable to coupling with the G qresidues H5.16 (L349) and H5.22 (E355), maintaining this cri- tical common contact of 568 with G.H5.1633. This provides evidence for using the spatiotemporal code to decipher structural determinants which mediate selective and promiscous GPCR coupling. As we showed in our previous work, coupling can be facilitated betweenGPCRs and non-cognate G proteins by removing certain selectivitylters and improving the interaction of residues in the common con- tact positions, facilitating complex formation between a GPCR and Gprotein pair. The promiscuous ADRB2-TM samples the G proteincommon contacts with higher frequency than both the Gs protein andGq protein subfamily-speci c contacts. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'We infer that GPCRs which evolved to be selective towards a G protein subfamily requires speci c contacts to be made, thereby constraining the types of G protein towhich they can couple to. GPCRs that evolved the ability to pro- miscuously couple likely reduce the number of constraining contacts that are found among selective GPCRs. MD simulation is a key technique to provide insights into the role of the temporal sampling of GPCR:G protein contacts since the per-sistence of these contacts fall within the MD simulation time scale. Onecaveat to be noted is that the three-dimensional structures of theGPCR:G protein complexes form the initial models used in this study,and therefore the analysis here is limited to the resolved regions ofthese three-dimensional structures. However, intrinsically disorderedintracellular loops are known to modulate G protein selectivity 46and many of those determinants are not included in this study. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 9, 'content': 'In addition,the GPCR:G protein complexes could sample distinctly varied conformations 30that are not considered in this study. B a s e do nt h er e g i o n sr e s o l v e di nt h ei n d i v i d u a lGp r o t e i n s ,w e observe that the C-terminal H5 helix is the main contributor to con-tacts formed between GPCR and G protein. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'contribute to selectivity. In future structural studies, we may identify new speci city determinants in dif cult-to-resolve GPCR loop regions, particularly ICL3, with sites on the G protein outside of the H5 helix.This will improve efforts to model the dynamics of coupling selectivity. Still, in previous reporting by us and others, the H5 helix is shown to be sufcient for altering the selectivity of GPCRs to speci cG proteins 7,8,14,33,41,47,48. The spatiotemporal code derived in this study can be used to guide the design of mutants that stabilize interactions between GPCRsand different G proteins. Using the selective contacts identi ed for different G protein subfamilies in the spatiotemporal code, one canmodify these contact positions in a promiscuous GPCR or G protein toimprove af nity in a targeted manner to stabilize the GPCR:G protein interface. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'This can aid efforts to stabilize GPCR:G protein complexesfor structure determination and pharmacological targeting as well as in interpreting the effects of natural variation and disease mutations at these positions within the human population. Methods Calculation of promiscuity index for the 267 GPCRs The G protein coupling data from Inoue et al. and the Guide to Phar-macology database was obtained from GPCRdb. We used the catego-rical de nitions of primary and secondary coupling for each G protein subfamily as provided within these datasets. The coupling datafrom Avet et al. Table S1D: double normalized E maxvalues was used to dene categorical G protein subfamily coupling scores by converting the E maxvalues to primary (>0.8) or secondary (0.2 < x<0 . 8 )c o u - pling. These qualitative scores were then converted into a numericalscore consistently across all three datasets by assigning a value of 1 forprimary ,0.5forsecondary ,a n d 0for non-couplers. For each receptor, we computed an average promiscuity across G proteinsubfamilies for each of the three datasets. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'We then applied a weight tothese scores to distinguish how the coupling interactions were mea-sured in the different datasets. Because the Avet et al. study measuredcoupling through BRET measurements, we weighted these interac-tions by multiplying each value by 4. The data obtained in the Guide to Pharmacology dataset is largely the result of manual curation of the literature, so we multiplied these values by a weight of 2.F o ri n t e r - actions observed in the Inoue et al. dataset, in which the authors use a chimeric Gq protein to measure interactions, we applied a score of 1. Ac o m p o s i t e promiscuity index was derived for each GPCR by then taking the average of these weighted indices. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Receptor model and ligand preparation We have prepared all nine GPCR:G protein complexes for MD simula-tions starting from respective X-ray crystal or Cryo-EM structures(ADRB2 with Gs from pdb code of 3SN6 19, ADORA2A with mini-Gs from pdb code of 6GDG20, ADORA1 with Gi2 from pdb code of 6D9H26, HTR1B with Go1 from pdb code of 6G7921,C H R M 1w i t hG 1 4f r o mp d b code of 6OIJ27, HTR2A with chimeric mini-Gq from pdb code 6WHA49, DRD1 with Gs from pdb code 7JVP50, CNR1 with Gi from pdb code 6N4B51, and HRH1 with Gq from pdb code 7DFL52. The mutations in ADRB2 (M96T, M98T, and N187E) were mutated back to the wild-typeresidues using Maestro (Schrdinger Release 2020-1: Maestro, Schr-dinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2020.). Following mutations were done toconvert G proteins to wild type: GNAS (7JVP) - A226G, S366A; GNAQ(7DFL) - T10C, A13E, D15A, A17E, V19R, E20R, R21I, S22N, K23D, M24E,D26E, N28Q, E31R, G33K, E34R, K35D, L324I. We added the missingsidechain residues and loops with fewer than ve missing amino acids to the three-dimensional structures of the GPCR:G protein complex (G heterotrimer included). The GPCR:G protein complex was embedded in explicit 1-Palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocho-line (POPC) bilayer membrane and solvated with water containing0.15 M NaCl. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Residues within 5  of the sites of mutation were mini-mized using MacroModel (Schrdinger Release 2020-1: MacroModel,Schrdinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2020.) with position restraints on all backbone atoms. We have prepared all force eld parameter for ago- nists (adenosine for ADORA1 and ADORA2A, BI-167107 for  2AR, donitriptan for HTR1B, iperoxo for CHRM1, 25CN-NBOH for HTR2A, SKF83959 for DRD1, MDMB-Fubinaca for CNR1, and histamine for HRH1.) using PRODRG server53. We calculated ESP (electrostatic potential) charge using Hartree-Fock method in the quantummechanics software suite Jaguar 54. We used the 6 31 G* basis set to calculate ESP charges. MD simulations for GPCR complexes All MD simulations were performed using GROMACS2019 package55 with CHARMM36m force eld56with TIP3 water molecules. GPCR:G protein complexes were embedded into POPC (1-Palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) bilayer by CHARMM-GUI 57. All crystal waters were retained, and 0.15 mM of sodium and chloride ions were added to neutralize each system. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Each of GPCR complexes was mini-mized in energy using the steepest descent method in GROMACS. TheSETTLE 58and LINCS59algorithms were used, for the bond and angle for water and all other bonds, allowing 2 fs of time step. A cutoff distanceof 12  for nonbond contacts was introduced, and the PME (particlemesh Ewald) method 60was used for long-range vdW interactions. Each solvated complex was rst equilibrated by performing 200 ps of MD at 310 K using NVT ensemble. In this step, the atoms ofthe complex were restrained in their positions using a harmonicrestraining force with a force constant of 1000 kJ/mol/nm 2.T h ew a t e r molecules and lipid bilayer were allowed to move to optimize their packing around the complex. As the next step, the complex was fur-ther equilibrated in the constant pressure and temperature (NPT)ensemble using gradually reduced harmonic position restraint from 5to 1 kcal/mol/ 2applied to all heavy atoms of protein (receptor with heterotrimeric G protein). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'In the nal NPT equilibration run, all posi- tional restraints were released and run for 10 ns. The nal snapshot of the equilibration run was starting structure of production simulations.We performed ve replica runs with different initial velocities with each run up to 800 ns after NVT equilibration followed by stepwiseNPT equilibration. A combined 1000 ns ensemble trajectory made from timesteps 600 ns ~ 800 ns of each velocity was used for the analysis contained in this manuscript. Parsing pairwise intermolecular contacts between GPCR and G  protein MD simulation trajectories were concatenated as 1 s ensembles. These trajectories were stored as xtc coordinate les and used to characterize the landscape of pairwise intermolecular residuecontacts taking place between GPCR and G protein during the simulation. To characterize the pairwise contacts made, we used thegetcontacts python script library ( https://www.github.com/ getcontacts ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Contacts are de ned as: salt-bridge, <4.0  cutoff between anion and cation atoms; hydrogen bond, <3.5  cutoffbetween hydrogen donor and acceptor atoms as well as <70 degreeangle between donor and acceptor; van der Waals, <2  differencebetween two atoms; pi-stack contacts, <7.0  distance betweenaromatic centers of aromatic residues and <30 degree anglebetween normal vectors emanating from aromatic plane of eachresidue; cation-pi contacts, <6.0  distance between cation atomand centroid of aromatic rink and <60 degree angle between normalvector from aromatic plane to cation atom. For each GPCR:G pro-tein complex simulation, the water, ion, and lipid molecules werestripped from the trajectory le used for contacts analysis. Within the command-line prompt to execute the script, the atom selection groups were set to match the chain identi ers and sequence range of amino acid residues in the GPCR ( --sele ) and G protein (--sele2 ), adding a quali er to only consider sidechain atoms for both sets of residues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 10, 'content': 'This allowed us to map the pairwise,Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34055-5 Nature Communications |         (2022) 13:7428 10', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'sidechain-sidechain interactions which contribute to binding in a sequence-speci cmanner. We performed this analysis for all eight simulations of the GPCR:G protein complexes (six original PDBsfrom crystal and cryo-EM, two modeled complexes of pro- miscuous GPCRs). The output of the contacts analysis was then converted into a binary ngerprint for each simulation (Supplementary Data 9), using in-house python scripts to perform the one-hot encoding (AnacondaSoftware Distribution. Computer software. Vers. 2-2.4.0. Anaconda,Nov. 2016. Web. https://anaconda.com )T h e rst script ( rela- bel_resconts.py ) converted each GPCR and G protein pdb number into a corresponding generic residue number based on the GPCRdbnumbering 40and the Common G protein numbering41. The second script (contRes_ ngerPrints.py) populates a dictionary; the keys are each pairwise GPCR:G protein contact pair, and the values are an array of0matching the length of frames within the trajectory. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'When parsing the contact list frame-by-frame, any frame containing thecontact pair results in a replacement of a 0to a 1at the index position corresponding to the frame number. This dictionary is con-v e r t e di n t oad a t af r a m eo b j e c t 61with pandas 1.4.3. The getcontacts scripts were used to compute the frequencies of each GPCR:G proteinresidue Figure contact across all eight simulations. Computing the linear discriminant model and derivation of the spatiotemporal code for selectivity The resulting data frames were used to build a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) classi er using the Scikit learn 1.1.1 package62to identify the key pairwise contacts that distinguish binding across the differentG protein subfamilies. Data frames from the original 6 PDB complexeswere used to build the model using jupyter notebook 5.0 63.A D R B 2a n d ADORA2A data frames were concatenated into the Gsclass. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'The Gi class was comprised of ADORA1 and HTR1B, and data frames from theCHRM1 and HTR2A data frames represented the Gqclass of residue contacts. The data was ltered to omit any pairwise contacts that were found in GPCR regions that were not resolved in all three classes,resulting in a total of 746 unique contact pairs. The LDA was tu s i n g singular value decomposition (svd) and transformed into a two- dimensional space of the rst and second linear discriminants of the model. There is a total of 293,757 timepoints resulting from the MD simulations of the six GPCR:G protein complexes, with 764 contactsused as features of this dataset. As an initial test of the model, weperformed a random 80:20 split on the dataset to train the LDA clas-sier using 80% of the data and tested the classi cation of the remaining 20% (Supplementary Figure 4a). This trained classi er explained 66.38% of the variance within component 1, and 33.62% ofthe variance within component 2. When testing the classi cation of the 20% holdout data, we achieved an accuracy of 99.64% of correct classi cation (Supplementary Fig. 4b). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'The scaling of each contact for Component 1 and Component 2of the linear discriminant are given in Supplementary Data 4. The weight vectors for each class (separated as Gs, Gi, and Gq in this model)and the mean contact frequency of each pairwise contact is given foreach G protein subfamily (Supplementary Data 5, columns cGx and wGx ). We combined the weights and mean frequencies of the con- tacts into a composite score, which allows us to use the spatialimportance and the temporal persistence to identify the most criticalcontacts for selective interactions (Supplementary Data 5, columnswGx ). We used the top-10 residue contacts based on composite score to use in our spatiotemporal code of contact pairs that distinguish each G protein subfamily from one another. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'The covariance matrix of features for the 764 contacts is given (Supplementary Data 7) along with the two-dimensional plottingcoordinates ( component 1 and component 2 )f o re a c h ngerprint of the dataset (Supplementary Data 4).Calculation of average frequency of contact per residue for all receptors For the simulated GPCRs and their coupled G proteins, we calculated the average frequency (percentage of MD snapshots) per contact for those within the subset of common contacts and those made in the subset of subfamily speci c contacts for the cognate G protein sub- family for each receptor. We averaged the contact frequency across allof the common and subfamily speci cc o n t a c t ss a m p l e db yag i v e n GPCR:G protein complex and recor d e dt h i sa st h ea v e r a g ef r e q u e n c y shown in Fig. 5c. Calculation of average gnom AD frequencies and activity of ADRB2 mutants from deep mutational scan gnomAD missense variant frequencies were downloaded for six GPCRs (ADRB2, ADORA2A, ADORA1, HTR1B, CHRM1, HTR2A) directly from the gnomAD 3.1 web portal ( https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/ ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Missense variants at the GPCR positions identi ed in the relevant G protein selective LDA code were identi ed, and we calculated the mean frequency of variation across each of these positions for eachreceptor. We then calculated the average frequency of variation acrossall the remaining residue positions within each receptor to determinethe relative abundance of mutations at the selective GPCR positionswithin the representation of the general population. For the analysis of ADRB2 deep mutational scan data, we obtained the dataset of processed mutant activity data from the Jones et al. 2020eLife 44Additional lesrepository. The data were strati ed into each of the tested concentrations and reported for each amino acid mutant at every ADRB2 residue position. We calculated the activity of theADRB2 mutants stimulated at the EC 100(625 nM) concentration of isoproterenol for the Gs-selective residue positions found within theGs-selective LDA spatiotemporal code, and we calculated the globalaverage of mutant activity at each residue position across the entiredataset. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Results were plotted using ggplot2_3.3.6 in R. Calculation of average interaction energies of common and speci c contacts for all receptors The interaction energy (IE) between receptors and their respective G-proteins was calculated with the GROMACS energy program. Resulting IE was the total nonbond energy from short-range (within 12Angstroms) Van der Waals and Coulombic forces. Data are representedas the summed average energies for pairwise contacts from the com-mon and G protein-speci c interactions identi ed for each GPCR:G protein pair, calculated from the terminal 100 ns of each replicated MDsimulation. Data are presented as mean  SD from ve replicate MD trajectories. Experimental reagents Dulbecco sM o d i ed Eagle Media (DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS) (#1968431), and other cell culture additives were purchased from Gibco, Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). Linear polyethylenimine MW25000 (PEI) (#23966-1) was purchased from Polyscience, Inc (War-rington, PA). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Coelenterazine 400a was purchased from NanolightTechnology (#70217-82-2) (Pinetop, AZ). Anti-HA-peroxidase rat anti-body (3F10) (#12013819001) was purchased from Roche (Manheim,Germany). BSA was purchased from Fisher BioReagents (Hampton,NH). Carbachol (#C4382), Poly-L-ornithine, SIGMAFAST OPD (#P9187-50SET) and 16% paraformaldehyde (PFA) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louise, ML). YM-254890 (#257-00631) was purchased fromFUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. DNA oligonucleotides were obtainedfrom Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). Plasmids and constructs Biosensors for Gq64,G i 364,E P A C42are described previously. An HA- tag (YPYDVPDYA) was inserted at the N-terminus of human M1receptor (CHRM1) by PCR cloning. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 12, 'content': 'generated via a two-fragment PCR strategy. Brie y, for each mutant, mutation containing plasmids in half were generated by stepdownPCR using forward or reverse site-directed mutagenesis primers andColE1 reverse or forward primers, respectively in two separated PCR reactions. The methylated template DNA in the PCR reaction were digested with DpnI and the PCR products were puri ed, and assembled together via Gibson recombination. All the mutant s coding DNA were veri ed by DNA sequencing (Genome Quebec, CES). The DNA sequences of all the primers were given in Supple-mentary Table 1. Cell culture and transfections HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS,and 20 g/ml gentamicin. Cells were grown at 37 C in 5% CO 2and 90% humidity. Cells were seeded at a density of 2.0  104cells per well in a white 96-well at bottom plate (for BRET) or clear 96-well at bottom (for ELISA) and simultaneously transfected with receptor and sensorDNA using PEI transfection reagent. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Brie y, 150 ng of hM1 DNA along with either 250 ng of Gq polycitronic sensor DNA, 25 ng of Gai3-RlucII/60 ng of GFP10G 2/60 ng of G 1 DNA(Gi3 sensor) or 25 ng of EPAC sensor DNA (adjusted total DNA amount to 1 g by pcDNA) in 100 lo f PBS were mixed with 100 l of PBS containing 3 l of PEI. After 20 min incubation, the DNA/PEI complexes were dispensed into cells in 96-well plates (~15 l/well). All assays were performed 48 h post- transfection. Gq Polycistronic, Gi3, and EPAC biosensors were usedto assess Gq, Gi, and Gs activity respectively. BRET measurements HEK293T cells expressing receptor and BRET sensors were incubatedfor 1 h with Tyrode s buffer (140 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl 2, 12 mM NaHCO 3, 5.6 mM D-glucose, 0.5 mM MgCl 2,0 . 3 7m MN a H 2PO4, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). Cells were stimulated with serially dilutedcarbachol from 10 8Mt o1 02M, and the BRET signal was recorded using the Biotek Synergy 2 plate reader with lter set 410/80 nm (donor) and 515/30 nm (acceptor). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Cells transfected with EPAC bio-sensor were pretreated with 500 nM of YM-254890 compound for30 min before carbachol stimulations. Cell-permeable substrate coe- lenterazine 400a ( nal concentration of 2.5 M) was added 3 min prior to BRET measurements. BRET ratios were calculated by dividing theintensity of signal emitted by acceptor over the signal of light emittedby donor. The data was tted to 12-point concentration response curves and analyzed for its activity. The experiments were performedas three biological replicates of the 12 single dosages, performed ondifferent days. Cell surface expression via ELISA WT and mutant receptors were transfected into HEK293T cells in poly-ornithine coated clear bottom 96-well plate. On the day of the experiment, the cells were washed once with PBS and xed with 4% PFA in PBS for 15 min. The cells were then blocked with 1% BSA in PBSfor 1 h and then incubated with anti-HA HRP (1:1000 in 1% BSA/PBS) for1 h. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Dynamic spatiotemporal determinants modulate GPCR:G protein coupling selectivity and promiscuity', 'page': 12, 'content': 'The cells were washed four times with PBS and 100 l of SIGMA- FAST OPD solution was added into each well. After 10 min, 25 lo f3M HCl was added to stop the reaction. The plate was then read at 492 nmin the Biotek Synergy 2 plate reader. Speci c signals were obtained by subtracting the signal from mock (pcDNA) transfected cells. Theexperiments were performed as 12 technical replicates of three bio-logical experiments performed on different days. Data analysis and statistics Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 soft-ware using Student st-test. Pvalues as well as signi cance were reported for logEC 50and Emax % differentials. The curves presented represent the best ts and were generated using GraphPad Prism software.Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the NatureResearch Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability All data and analysis scripts used during the current study are includedwith the article (and its supplementary information les). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': '650  | Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 ArticleCombinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms  affects signalling and drug responses Maria Marti-Solano1, Stephanie E. Crilly2, Duccio Malinverni1,3, Christian Munk4,   Matthew Harris5, Abigail Pearce5, Tezz Quon6, Amanda E. Mackenzie6, Xusheng Wang7,8,  Junmin Peng7,9, Andrew B. Tobin6, Graham Ladds5, Graeme Milligan6, David E. Gloriam4,  Manojkumar A. Puthenveedu2,10 & M. Madan Babu1,3 G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are membrane proteins that modulate  physiology across human tissues in response to extracellular signals. GPCR-mediated  signalling can differ because of changes in the sequence1,2 or expression3 of the  receptors, leading to signalling bias when comparing diverse physiological systems4.  An underexplored source of such bias is the generation of functionally diverse GPCR isoforms with different patterns of expression across different tissues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Here we integrate data from human tissue-level transcriptomes, GPCR sequences and  structures, proteomics, single-cell transcriptomics, population-wide genetic  association studies and pharmacological experiments. We show how a single GPCR  gene can diversify into several isoforms with distinct signalling properties, and how unique isoform combinations expressed in different tissues can generate distinct  signalling states. Depending on their structural changes and expression patterns,  some of the detected isoforms may influence cellular responses to drugs and  represent new targets for developing drugs with improved tissue selectivity. Our  findings highlight the need to move from a canonical to a context-specific view of  GPCR signalling that considers how combinatorial expression of isoforms in a  particular cell type, tissue or organism collectively influences receptor signalling and  drug responses. GPCRs constitute the largest family of membrane proteins that are  expressed across human tissues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': 'They govern diverse physiological  responses by binding extracellular ligands and transducing their sig - nal to intracellular coupling partners. Our understanding of GPCRs  has been complicated by the phenomenon of signalling bias, which  results in variable downstream responses owing to differential recep - tor coupling to intracellular partners3,5. Signalling bias can be seen  when comparing receptor activation by different ligands6, or in dif - ferent systems such as cell types or tissues3,5. This phenomenon was  first described through the characterization of synthetic GPCR ligands   that are capable of biasing downstream signalling5, but the mecha - nisms that drive physiological signalling bias are less well understood.   Two key contributors to signalling bias are changes in receptor   sequence arising from genetic variation (for example, polymor - phisms1,2), and the system-specific expression of GPCR signalling  components4,7. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Protein isoformsgenerated by tissue-specific alternative splicing  and via alternative transcription start and termination sites (Extended  Data Fig.1a)are an important source of functional diversity8. Some  GPCRs have several isoforms with distinct signalling properties9,10, and splicing events can affect different receptor regions11. However,  the extent to which receptor isoforms contribute to structural and  functional diversity, their expression pattern in human tissues, and  the manner in which combinatorial isoform expression can generate  diverse signalling states and contribute to physiological signalling  bias are fundamentally unexplored. Given that more than one-third  of approved drugs target GPCRs12,13, an understanding of how isoform  diversity can influence function is important not only to understand  receptor physiology, but also to assess how it may affect responses  to drugs. Here, through a data science approach, we have obtained a GPCR-wide  view of isoform diversity in humans. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': 'Our results show how GPCRs from  different classes diversify in key structural segments that determine  receptor function. We have also mapped isoform expression in human  tissues to reveal how different combinations of GPCR isoforms with  distinct pharmacological properties can contribute to system-specific  signalling. Our characterization of GPCR isoforms is accessible through  the GPCRdb database (https://gpcrdb.org/protein/isoforms), and can  serve as a roadmap for assessing isoform diversity in any receptor and  its role in physiological signalling bias.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2888-2 Received: 9 October 2019 Accepted: 24 September 2020 Published online: 4 November 2020  Check for updates 1MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. 2Cellular and Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 3Department of Structural Biology and Center for  Data Driven Discovery, St Jude Childrens Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 4Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 1, 'content': ' 5Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 6Centre for Translational Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical,  Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 7Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St Jude Childrens Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 8Department of Biology,  University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, USA. 9Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Childrens Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 10Department  of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 2, 'content': 'Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 | 651Isoform structural changes diversify function To study the isoforms of GPCRs, we combined transcript-level data  on messenger RNA expression from the GenotypeTissue Expres - sion (GTEx) Consortium14 with sequence and structural annotations  from GPCRdb15 (Extended Data Fig.1b). We filtered transcripts by  their expression level, by their annotation as protein-coding , and  by the integrity of their signal peptides (Methods). Only isoforms with at least one conserved transmembrane segment were selected.  We detected 363 different GPCRs and 625 distinct isoforms (363  reference isoforms, corresponding to GPCRdb sequences, and 262  non-reference isoforms); 136 receptors (38%) have more than one  isoform. This diversity is seen in different GPCR classes and is not  restricted to receptors that interact with particular types of intra - cellular G proteins or extracellular endogenous ligands (Extended  Data Fig.1c, d). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 2, 'content': 'a b *Functionally validated structural /f_ingerprints in the literature c Previously characterized isoforms CCR9, CNR1, CX3C1, CXCR3, CXCR4,  FSHR, GP132, LSHR, PACR Uncharacterized isoforms ACKR1, AGRA2, AGRB3, AGRD1, AGRE1,  AGRE2, AGRE3, AGRF5, AGRG1, AGRG2,  AGRG4, AGRG6, AGRL1, AGRL2, BKRB2,  CASR, CCR3, CCR7, CCRL2, CD97,  CELR3, CML1, CRFR1, GABR1, GIPR,  GP143, GP161, GPR35, GPR6, GPR98,  LGR4, LGR5, LPAR1, MRGRE, NPFF2,  OGR1, RXFP2, TS1R1, VIPR2N term* TM3 to C ter m TM4 to C ter m TM2 to TM5TM6 TM7 to C ter mN term to ICL15HT4R, 5HT7R, GRM1, TA2R, OPRM  AA2AR, ADA1A, AGRB2, AGRG2, AGRG6,  AGRL2, GP146, GPC5B, GPC5D, GRM5,  GRM7, GRM8, HRH2, HRH3, MSHR,  OGR1, OPN5, PTH1R, SSR2 5HT2C AA2AR, ACKR2, ACTHR, CCR2, CXCR2,  FPR2, GP141, GP160, GPR1, GPR17,  GPR18, GPR85, P2RY6, P2Y14, TA2R GNRH ACKR2, C3AR, CXCR2, FPR2, GNRHR,  GP160, GPC5B, KISSR, LPAR1, MC5R,  TPRA1 CCR2, EDNRB, NK1R, PE2R3 GIPR, OX1R, RAI3, TA2R ADA1A, GHSR MTLR, P2RY6, PD2R, PF2R, V2R DRD2, GASR OPRM, OPRK EDNRA, MCHR1PACR, AGRL2 V2R, MRGX3C ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 2, 'content': 'a b *Functionally validated struterm H8 to C term TM6 to C ter m ICL3 TM1 CRFR1, OPN4* * * * * *****Altered  ligand binding or ef/f_icacy Altered  receptor coupling Altered internalizatio n Altered  membrane traf/f_icking Intracellular retention of the reference isoformCell signalling changes ICL3Functional impactAffected segment(s) N term C term H8  to C termStructural /f_ingerprint abundanceTransform  alignment into structural /f_ingerprints Count number of unique /f_ingerprints Topologically   preservedReference C term H8 N term GPCRdb-annotated receptor alignmentTM1TM7 ECL3 TM6 ... Topologically   truncated Receptor class distribution * 55 unique structural /f_ingerprints*** * * * ** * ** *136 65 32 11 9 7 6 445 33 22 22 2 22 2 11 11 11023 10 9 9 7Reference  isoforms B1CTaste 2 AB 2Other B1N-terminal variantsOther A B2C C-terminal variants B1A B2C 16 structural segments Topologically   preservedReference Topologically   truncated C term050100150 H8 N termTM1TM7 ECL3 ECL2 ECL1ICL3 ICL2 ICL1TM6 TM5TM4 TM3 TM2 Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 2, 'content': '1 | Structural diversity and functional impact of receptor isoforms. a,  Annotation of multiple sequence alignments of GPCR isoforms allowed us to  classify them as topologically preserved when their transmembrane segments had the same sequence as the reference, and as topologically truncated when  one or more transmembrane segments were altered (dark and light blue,  respectively). C and N term, C and N terminus; ECL, extracellular loop; H8, helix 8; TM, transmembrane. b , Abundance of structural fingerprints for receptors  with two or more isoforms. Dark and light blue bars represent the abundance of topologically preserved and truncated versions, respectively, of a structural fingerprint. The grey bar represents the abundance of the structural fingerprint representing reference isoforms. Pie charts show the distribution of GPCR classes in the three most common fingerprints. Asterisks indicate fingerprints with at least one functionally characterized receptor in the  literature. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 2, 'content': 'ICL, intracellular loop. c , Association between structural  fingerprints and functional impact, as available in the literature. Receptors  with functionally characterized isoforms are listed in black. Heights of the stacked bars represent the number of characterized isoforms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': '652 | Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 ArticleWe next evaluated structural variation in GPCR isoforms. We clas - sified non-reference isoforms as topologically preserved when their  transmembrane segments had the same sequence as the reference,  and topologically truncated when one transmembrane segment or  more was altered (Fig. 1a, dark and light blue, and Extended Data  Fig.2). To calculate the prevalence of particular structural changes in  non-reference isoforms, we generated structural fingerprints: each  receptor segment forming the fingerprint is denoted as a circle, with  segments that are identical to the reference isoform in black, and vary - ing or missing segments in grey (Fig. 1a). The resulting 55 distinct struc - tural fingerprints (Fig. 1b) reveal that, after the reference isoform, the  most frequent structural fingerprints represent isoforms with changes  in their amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal segments. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Next, we find  three fingerprints corresponding to truncated isoforms and a finger- print representing isoforms with altered helix8 and C termini (Fig. 1b). Interestingly, isoforms of class B2 receptors are enriched in fingerprints  with variation in the N-terminal segment, and class C receptor isoforms  in fingerprints with variation in the C-terminal segment (Fig. 1b, inset).  This could mirror the functionality of these segments, as N-terminal  regions of class B2 receptors interact with extracellular matrix proteins,  and N-terminal changes could rewire these interactions16,17. Similarly, as  C-terminal segments can mediate oligomerization in class C receptors,  alterations in these segments could influence oligomerization states18. To assess the functional diversity of the isoforms, we carried out  an extensive literature search. We obtained published evidence for  isoforms belonging to 12 fingerprints (asterisks in Fig.1b ) and linked  them to different functional changes (Fig. 1c and Supplementary  Table1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': 'Isoforms with alternative N termini tend to display altered  ligand binding and/or efficacy and are the most frequently charac - terized (Fig. 1c). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': 'For instance, in the chemokine receptor CXCR3, ACKR2AGRB2 AGRB3AGRL2 CXCR2 FPR2AA2AR 5HT7RADA1A OPRMPE2R3 GPR85 AGRD1 OPN5 CD97AGRG6TPRA1AGRG2 LPAR1G137A GPC5BAGRE2 CNR1 051015 36 91 2 Number of isof ormsNumber of tissue-e xpression signatures 160180200220 1.31.41.51.61.71.81.9bNumber of receptors Mean isoforms per receptorCNR1 CD97 30 GTEx tissues Four tissue- expression  signatures Reference 1 2IsoformThree isoformsa Adipose tissue Adrenal gland Bladder Blood Blood v essel Brain Breast Cervix uteri Colon Oesophagus Fallopian tube Heart Kidney Liver Lung Muscle Nerve Ovary Pancreas Pituitary Prostate Salivary gland Skin Small intestine Spleen Stomach Testis Thyroid Uterus Vagina One tissue- expression  signature Reference 1 2IsoformThree isoformsPancreas Muscle Liver Bladder Blood Cerv ix uter i Fallopian tu be Kidne y Spleen Saliv ary gland Ovary Hear t Adrenal gland Uteru s Stomach Small intestin e Prostate Vagina Nerv e Colon Breast Testis Lung Thyroid Blood ve ssel Adipose tissue Brain Oesophagus Skin Pituitary Fig. 2 | Tissue distribution of GPCR isoforms. a, Relationship between the  number of GPCRs (left axis, grey line) and mean number of isoforms per  receptor (right axis, means in black and standard error bars in grey) expressed in different tissues. All data used to generate this representation can be found  in Supplementary Table2. b , Left, isoform expression matrix for cannabinoid 1 and adhesion G-protein-coupled receptor E5 (CNR1 and CD97). Right,  relationship between the number of isoforms per receptor and the number of tissue-expression signatures. The grey regression line was obtained using a linear model, with the confidence interval representing the standard error. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': '!"##!$#!%#!&#!\'##\'# 10080604020020 !"#$!"#%!"#&!"#\'""#\'"#&"#% 0.80.60.40.200.20.40.6 0.60.40.200.20.4a CNR1 tissue distribution referenc e Reference + isoform 1 11 35 10 Breast, skin, nerve, small intestine, adipose tissue, thyroid,  Stomach,   vagina, ovaryReference + isoform 2 Muscle, testis, prostate, pituitary, colon All isoforms GIPR tissue distributionFsk cAMPAC GiCNR1b Reference + isoform 2Reference + isoform 1Reference + reference d c Reference Adrenal gland, bladder,  blood vessel, brain,   oesophagus, liver, nerve,   pituitary, spleen, testis, thyroi d Reference + iso form 1 Adipose tissue, blood, breast, cervix uteri, colon,  fallopian tube, heart, kidney, lung, pancreas,  prostate,sa livary g land, skin, sma ll intest ine, nn/uni03B2-arrestin-1 /uni03B2-arrestin-216 1100 0 Ca2+cAMPlogRAi e /uni03B2-arrestin-1 /uni03B2-arrestin-2Ca2+cAMP/uni0394Emax /uni03B2-arrestin-1 /uni03B2-arrestin-2Ca2+cAMP/uni0394pEC50Brain, adrenal gland,  pancreas, salivary gland,  fallopian tube, uterus,  heart, bladder, spleen, Reference kidney, cervix uteri lung, oesophagus, blood vessel, blood stomach, va gina5 /uni03BCM Fsk 012345671.01.52.0 Time (min)C', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': '!"##!$#!%#!&#!\'##\'# 10080604020020 !"#$!"#%!"#&!"#\'""#\'"#&"#% 0.80.60.40.200.20.40.6 0.60.40.200.20.4a CNR1 tissue distribution referenc e Reference + isoform 1 1FP/FRET norm to baseline 0.8 Fig. 3 | Combinatorial isoform expression influences pharmacological  responses.  a, Tissue distribution of the reference CNR1 isoform (grey) and two  non-reference isoforms (purple and green). b, Left, representation of  CNR1-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase (AC) and its modulation by  forskolin (Fsk). Right, representative trace of mean cAMP levels in  Fsk-stimulated HEK293 cells expressing a Flag-tagged reference isoform and different SNAP-tagged isoforms. c , Tissue distribution of the GIPR reference  isoform (grey) and isoform 1 (pink). d , Radar plots summarizing differences in potency (pEC 50) and maximum response ( Emax) for cAMP and intracellular  Ca2+ release, and for the recruitment of -arrestin-1 and -2, in HEK293T cells  coexpressing GIPRnanoluciferase (Nluc) reference and GIPRNluc isoform1 (magenta line) or expressing the GIPRNluc reference isoform only (dark grey line) ( n=4 independent experiments, performed in duplicate). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 3, 'content': 'e , Log intrinsic  relative activity (logRA i) values for the combination of GIPRNluc reference  and GIPRNluc isoform1 (magenta) relative to GIPRNluc reference (dark grey).', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 | 653isoforms with different N termini display unique efficacy profiles in  terms of activation of the Gi subunit, recruitment of -arrestin, and  phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (ref. 19). Isoforms with C-terminal variation  mostly show altered coupling, internalization and membrane traf - ficking. For instance, in the thromboxane A2 receptor, a C-terminal  variant can still signal via phospholipase C, but inhibits the produc - tion of cyclic AMP instead of stimulating it20. As post-translational  modifications can modulate the GPCR life cycle21, we also analysed  whether experimentally validated C-terminal phosphorylation sites  were preserved in non-reference isoforms. We observed that some  isoforms lacked key phosphorylation sites (Extended Data Fig.3a, b),  suggesting possible trafficking differences. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'For highly truncated iso - forms, experiments revealed dominant-negative effects through the  sequestering of the reference isoform in the endoplasmic reticulum (for  example, in the5-hydroxytryptamine 2C and gonadotropin-releasing  hormone receptors22, 23). Truncated isoforms can also affect other  GPCRs. For instance, experiments in mice that involved knocking out  a six-transmembrane -opioid receptor isoform resulted in decreased  analgesic action for delta and kappa opioids and for 2-adrenergic  ligands24. Many uncharacterized isoforms share structural fingerprints with  the functionally characterized ones. This topological similarity sug - gests their possible functional alterations and can help in the design of  experiments for their characterization. However, the same fingerprint  can be related to different functional outcomes (Fig. 1c), emphasizing  that similarity in structural fingerprints should be considered only a  guide for functional inference. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Combinatorial expression and system bias To determine the possible contribution of receptor isoforms to system  bias, we analysed whether isoforms were ubiquitously expressed or  confined to particular tissues (Extended Data Fig.4a and Supplemen- tary Table2). We observed that the reference isoform is not always  the most highly expressed one (Extended Data Fig.4b), and that the  number of receptors expressed per tissue differs widely (ranging from  149 GPCRs in the pancreas to 236 in the pituitary; Fig. 2a). However, the  mean number of isoforms per receptor in each tissue remains consist - ently more than 1 (ranging from 1.42 to 1.72). Thus, in every tissue, one  or more receptors are expressed as multiple isoforms. This is also true  if we analyse the data for each donor (Extended Data Fig.4c). We then investigated whether distinct isoform combinations  are expressed in different tissues by computing how many unique isoform combinations exist for each GPCR (that is, the number of  tissue-expression signatures; Fig.2b ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'If isoforms have different sig - nalling properties, then different combinations could result in unique  signalling outcomes in response to the same input (Extended Data  Fig.4d). Thus, counting tissue-expression signatures (Fig. 2b) can reveal  the complexity of signalling responses upon systemic receptor activa - tion. As an example, we find four different tissue-expression signatures  for the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) but only one for the adhesion  G-protein-coupled receptor E5 (CD97), although both receptors have  three isoforms. Therefore, CNR1 may have more diverse signalling  responses than CD97. To highlight the impact of isoform combinations, we present two  case studies. We observed that several physiologically relevant tissues  for CNR1 function express different isoform combinations. Apart from  the reference isoform, we find two non-reference isoforms that vary in  their N-terminal segments and show altered ligand binding and potency  (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig.5a and Supplementary Table1). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'To assess the  functional impact of combinatorial isoform expression, we character - ized these isoforms in HEK293 cells. As CNR1 inhibits adenylate cyclase  through Gi (Fig. 3b), we measured cAMP levels by using a fluorescence  resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensor in live cells. Initial FRET ratios  were comparable in cells with and without a Flag-tagged reference isoform of CNR1 (Extended Data Fig.5b, inset). In cells expressing  the reference isoform, forskolin-stimulated cAMP levels were lower  than in cells without it (Extended Data Fig.5b). Lower cAMP levels are  consistent with high basal activity resulting from the production of  endogenous cannabinoids25. This trend was reversed by the inverse  agonist Rimonabant and the neutral antagonist AM4113 (Extended  Data Fig.5cg). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Upon coexpression of SNAP-tagged isoform 1 with a  Flag-tagged reference isoform, we observed a significant decrease in  endpoint cAMP levels; conversely, coexpression of isoform 2 caused a  faster forskolin response and higher total cAMP, although there were no  significant differences in relative expression levels across conditions  (Fig.3b and Extended Data Fig.5hj). Therefore, both the extent and  the rate of CNR1 signalling could be modulated by the coexpression of  different isoforms in different cell systems. Notably, in cells express - ing the reference isoform and isoform 2, Rimonabant caused higher  cAMP levels in a larger fraction of cells than in a system expressing the  reference isoform alone (Extended Data Fig.5k). For the gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor (GIPR), we detected  one non-reference isoform with C-terminal variation (Extended Data  Fig.5l). Comparing adipose tissue, adrenal gland, pancreas and brain,  where GIPR has regulatory functions26, revealed that these tissues  express either the reference or both isoforms (Fig. 3c), with no tissue  expressing the non-reference isoform alone. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Given that the C terminus  can influence receptor coupling, we measured the response of GIPR  isoforms to the gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), considering four  different endpoints (production of cAMP, mobilization of intracellular  calcium (Ca2+ i), and recruitment of -arrestin-1 and -2) in HEK293T  cells. The overall signalling capacity of isoform 1 of GIPR is significantly  lower than that of the reference (Extended Data Fig.5m), consistent  with its low level of expression (Extended Data Fig.5n). However, we  observed pathway-specific differences when comparing a system that  expressed the reference isoform alone with another that coexpressed  both isoforms. Cells coexpressing both isoforms showed a significant  reduction in the logarithmically transformed half-maximal effective  concentration (pEC50) of the cAMP response (P <0.0001), and in the  maximum response (Emax) for intracellular Ca2+ release and -arrestin  recruitment (all P<0.0001) (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig.5m, p). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': ' Differences in intrinsic relative activities (logRAi)an indicator of sig - nalling biasrevealed that isoform coexpression significantly biased  signalling away from cAMP (P <0.0001), leaving intracellular Ca2+  release and -arrestin recruitment not significantly affected (Fig. 3e).  GPR3 5Reference Isoform 1 Adipose tissue Adrenal gland Bladder BloodBlood ve ssel Brain Breast Cervix uteri Colon Oesophagus Fallopian tube Heart Kidney LiverLungMuscle Nerve Ovary Pancreas Pituitary ProstateSalivary gland Skin Small intestine Spleen Stomach Testis Thyroid Uterus Vagina G/uni03B113 /uni03B2-arrestin-2 Reference Isoform 1BRET ratio (percentage of reference maximum) BRET ratio (percentage of reference maximum) log [lodoxamide (M)]11 10 9 8 7 6050100 log [lodoxamide (M)]11 10 9 8 7 6050100 Reference Isoform 1 Fig. 4 | GPCR isoforms as potential drug targets. Top, tissue distribution of  the reference isoform and isoform 1 of GPR35. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 4, 'content': 'Bottom, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) signals were monitored after treating HEK293T cells with varying concentrations of lodoxamide using a GPR35G 13  SPASM sensor (left panel; n=3 biologically independent samples) or using GPR35 isoforms tagged with enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) and -arrestin-2 tagged with nanoluciferase (right panel; n=3 biologically  independent samples; seeMethods). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': '654 | Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 ArticleThese changes probably relate to a reduced cell-surface expression of  the reference isoform upon coexpression of isoform 1, suggesting a  dominant-negative effect, possibly via a direct interaction. Consistent  with this, cell-surface expression of isoform 1 is unaffected upon coex - pression of the reference isoform (Extended Data Fig.5n, o). Further  studies will be needed to dissect the mechanism and physiological  relevance of this crosstalk. Collectively, our observations suggest that distinct isoform combina - tions can diversify signalling outcomes in response to the same ligand.  Therefore, determining which receptor isoforms are expressed in a  system can allow the critical selection of models with similar isoform  composition. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This is important for two reasons: first, if the experimental  system does not mimic the one we intend to understand, it may not  provide a translatable readout; second, ignoring the isoforms already  expressed in that experimental system could bias measurements. These  findings highlight how distinct combinations of GPCR isoforms in   different tissues can generate system-specific signalling states, which,  in turn, could contribute to physiological signalling bias and affect  responses to drugs. Receptor isoforms as GPCR drug targets An analysis of 111 GPCRs that are targeted by 474 drugs approved by the  US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)13 revealed that 42% have more  than one isoform (Extended Data Fig.6a) and that there is extensive  variation in the number of approved drugs for receptors with the same  number of tissue-expression signatures (Extended Data Fig.6b). A drug  target with a high number of tissue-expression signaturesthe adeno - sine 2A receptor (AA2AR with 13)exemplifies how isoform diversity  could affect drug responses. Its tissue-expression signatures combine  some highly truncated isoforms, as well as a topologically preserved  isoform. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'The latter has a C terminus lacking a phosphorylation site that  is crucial for heterodimerization with the dopaminergic D2 receptor  (Extended Data Fig.3). This dimer, which results in negative allosteric  modulation of ligand binding in the partner receptor, has been related  to the antiparkinsonian effects of AA2AR antagonists27. This suggests  that the distribution of particular receptor isoforms could not only  result in tissue-specific responses to systemically administered drugs,  but also affect the efficacy of drugs that target other GPCRs. Although isoform diversity may confound our understanding of drug  effects, it also presents an opportunity to specifically target isoforms  with desired tissue-expression patterns. To assess whether clinical phe - notypes map uniquely to non-reference isoforms, we analysed data from  Gene ATLAS28, which associates single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)  and phenotypes from roughly 500,000 individuals in the UK Biobank. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': ' We identified statistically significant associations between SNPs within  non-reference isoforms that were uniquely linked to disease-related  phenotypes (Extended Data Fig.6c and Supplementary Table3). The  presence of isoform-specific phenotypes implies that, first, whole-exome  sequencing could reveal new associations between non-reference iso - form variants and clinical phenotypes; and second, phenome-wide asso - ciation studies that consider receptor isoforms might uncover previously  underappreciated isoform-specific therapeutic indications. Achieving isoform-level selectivity for new drug candidates will prob - ably require isoform-specific structural features to be accessible to  ligands (that is, to occur in extracellular receptor segments) (Extended  Data Fig. 6d), as well as a tissue distribution that differs from the ref - erence. By applying these filters, we identified 62 isoforms from 40  different receptors as candidate targets of pharmacological interest  (Extended Data Fig.6d and Supplementary Table4). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'One of these recep - tors, GPR35, is the target of an approved mast-cell stabilizer, lodoxam- ide29. GPR35 is also targeted by pamoic acida partial agonist, previously  used as an excipientthat has been found to attenuate visceral pain in  mice30. Therefore, GPR35 agonists could be of therapeutic interest in  allergy and in neuropathic pain. For GPR35, we detected a non-reference isoform with an extended N terminus (Extended Data Fig.6e). The GPR35  reference and isoform 1 have different expression patterns in pharma- cologically relevant tissues, with the lung expressing only the reference  isoform, while nerve expresses both isoforms. Characterization of ago - nists in HEK293T cells (Fig. 4 and Extended Data Fig.6f, g) revealed that  isoform 1 does not change G13 or -arrestin-2 signalling when compared  with the reference. However, the maximal signal intensity generated  was markedly lower, while potency remained comparable (Fig.4  and  Extended Data Fig.6f, g). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'This analysis of GPR35 exemplifies how, when  searching for receptor agonists, exploiting structural and expression  differences between isoforms could allow the detection of compounds  that target tissues of pharmacological interest, while avoiding receptor  activation elsewhere to prevent on-target side effects. By exploiting the  longer N terminus of isoform 1, and considering its restricted expression  and similar signalling behaviour, isoform-1-specific compounds could  elicit a GPR35 response in tissues such as nerve to treat visceral pain,  while avoiding undesired receptor activation in others. Conversely,  when trying to block GPCR signalling, all receptor isoforms should be  considered to ensure full inhibition or, at least, to prevent unexpected  pharmacodynamics. Beyond receptor isoforms with ligand-accessible  changes, allosteric modulators, intracellular compounds31 and  RNA-based approaches32 could expand isoform druggability. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'Further evidence and considerations Although our study reveals extensive diversity in GPCR isoforms, a  proteome-wide tissue-specific analysis would represent a valuable next Structurally and functionally diverse receptor isoforms[   ] Canonical view of receptor signallingContext-speci/f_ic view of receptor signalling[   ]  [   ] [   ] System 1 Expression of unique combinations of receptor isoforms [   ]s1s2s3sn... Diversity in signalling response s1 snSystem 2 System nLigand ... s1 sns1 sn Fig. 5 | From a canonical to a context-specific view of GPCR signalling. Top,  in the case of receptors with a single isoform, activation by a particular ligand concentration will result in an observed signalling readout. However, when receptors have multiple isoforms expressed in the same system(bottom), a  signalling readout may be the collective result of activating structurally and  pharmacologically distinct receptor isoforms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 5, 'content': 'If the isoform composition changes in different systems (S 1 to Sn), this can result in differences in signalling  in response to the same ligand. The different systems can correspond to different levels of complexity, from that of a single cell to tissues and entire organisms. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 | 655step. Full coverage of membrane proteins by mass-spectrometry-based  shot-gun proteomics is challenging, because of their low abundance  and their membrane-spanning nature33. Isoform characterization is  even more difficult as protein segments that discriminate isoforms  represent a small fraction of detectable receptor fragments. Despite  this, an analysis of multiple proteomics data sets revealed peptides that  discriminate reference and non-reference isoforms (https://gpcrdb. org/protein/isoforms (Extended Data Figs.7, 8 and Supplementary  Table5)). As differences in isoform expression levels could result in sys - tem bias34, another future direction is to quantify protein abundance.  This could help to identify additional lowly expressed but functionally  relevant isoforms. Further technical developments in targeted prot- eomics35 should allow for such characterization. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Our study provides a tissue-level resolution map of the expression  of GPCR isoforms. However, some isoforms may be confined to par - ticular cell types. Whenever possible, isoform expression should be  characterized at the cell-type level. To address this, we analysed 11  widely used human cell lines. Consistent with our tissue-level analysis,  we found receptors with multiple isoforms in all cell lines (Extended  Data Fig.9ac and Supplementary Table6). This isoform diversity has  important experimental implications, as variation in isoform expres- sion across cell lines could greatly affect pharmacological readouts.  In parallel, analysis of healthy human pancreatic single cells, obtained  by Smart-Seq single-cell RNA sequencing36, revealed multiple isoforms  per receptor in each cell type, confirming the prevalence of isoform  combinatorial expression in single cells (Extended Data Fig.9d and  Supplementary Table6). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Another consideration has to do with the  precise cellular location of different isoforms (for example, long and  short D2 receptor isoforms are classically post- and pre-synaptic37).  Although existing high-throughput approaches cannot reveal such  details, we hope that our analysis will enable individual laboratories  to delve deeper into a relevant cell type to investigate such questions  for their receptors of interest. Discussion Our systematic and integrative study (Extended Data Fig.10) highlights  how some GPCR genes give rise to a collection of isoforms with unique  structural and signalling properties, and how combinatorial isoform  expression might diversify signalling responses in human tissues. These  findings imply that, for these GPCRs, the observed signalling readouts  of a particular ligand may be a composite effect of that ligand acting  on a collection of isoforms (Fig.5 ). Furthermore, given that isoform  composition can differ between tissues, activation by the same ligand  could result in diverse, system-specific signalling responses (Fig.5 ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': ' Thus, when interpreting the action of ligands in these receptors, we  may need to move from the canonical view to a context-specific view of GPCR signalling, where one considers how structural diversity and  combinatorial isoform expression collectively drive system-specific  signalling (Fig. 5). These findings highlight the need to consider isoform composition  to successfully translate readouts from cell, tissue and animal mod - els to studies of human physiological responses. The association of  non-reference isoforms with specific clinical phenotypes in the human  population points to new opportunities for understanding human  physiology and for drug development. Furthermore, non-reference iso - forms with unique patterns of tissue expression and variation in specific  structural segments might represent new drug targets. Future research  on context-specific GPCR signalling and isoform selectivity might  therefore foster the development of drugs that address unmet clinical  needs and minimize on-target side effects. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'We hope that, beyond our  proof-of-principle characterization, this work will inspire more-detailed  research programmes in academia and industry. To facilitate this, we  have developed a resource that allows the exploration of GPCR isoform  diversity in humans (https://gpcrdb.org/protein/isoforms).In biology, gene duplication and isoform generation tend to be  inversely correlated mechanisms to diversify biological functions38.  Our observations of GPCR isoforms suggest that gene duplication and  isoform diversity in this family have been simultaneously exploited  during evolution. The finding that functionally diverse isoforms can be  differentially coexpressed points to a mechanism by which individual  tissues could finely regulate their response to the same extracellular  stimulus. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'In contrast with differential transcription of gene dupli - cates, the fact that isoforms can be post-transcriptionally regulated  might represent a rapid mechanism by which cells can exquisitely tune  responses to the same ligand. In this manner, isoform diversity could  have been exploited by organisms to rapidly mount different physi - ological responses to the same ligand at the tissue level, leading to a  coordinated homeostatic response at an organism level. Online content Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting sum- maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information,  acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author con - tributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code  availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2888-2. 1. Hauser, A. S. etal. Pharmacogenomics of GPCR drug targets. Cell  172, 4154 (2018). 2. Thompson, M. D. etal. Pharmacogenetics of the G protein-coupled receptors. Methods  Mol. Biol. 1175, 189242 (2014). 3. Kenakin, T. Biased receptor signaling in drug discovery. Pharmacol. Rev. 71, 267315  (2019). 4. Smith, J. S., Lefkowitz, R. J. & Rajagopal, S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Biased signalling: from simple switches to  allosteric microprocessors. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 17, 243260 (2018). 5. Urban, J. D. etal. Functional selectivity and classical concepts of quantitative pharmacology. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 320, 113 (2007). 6. Stallaert, W., Christopoulos, A. & Bouvier, M. Ligand functional selectivity and quantitative   pharmacology at G protein-coupled receptors. Expert Opin. Drug Discov. 6, 811825  (2011). 7. Kenakin, T. & Christopoulos, A. Signalling bias in new drug discovery: detection, quantification and therapeutic impact. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 12, 205216 (2013). 8. Buljan, M. etal. Alternative splicing of intrinsically disordered regions and rewiring of protein interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 23, 443450 (2013). 9. Kilpatrick, G. J., Dautzenberg, F. M., Martin, G. R. & Eglen, R. M. 7TM receptors: the splicing  on the cake. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 20, 294301 (1999). 10. Markovic, D. & Challiss, R. A. J. Alternative splicing of G protein-coupled receptors:  physiology and pathophysiology. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 66, 33373352 (2009). 11. Zhou, J., Zhao, S. & Dunker, A. K. Intrinsically disordered proteins link alternative splicing and post-translational modifications to complex cell signaling and regulation. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 23422359 (2018). 12. Sriram, K. & Insel, P. A. G. G protein-coupled receptors as targets for approved drugs: how many targets and how many drugs? Mol. Pharmacol. 93, 251258 (2018). 13. Hauser, A. S., Attwood, M. M., Rask-Andersen, M., Schith, H. B. & Gloriam, D. E. Trends in GPCR drug discovery: new agents, targets and indications. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 16,  829842 (2017). 14. Mel, M. etal. The human transcriptome across tissues and individuals. Science 348,  660665 (2015). 15. Kooistra, A. J., Mordalski, S., Pndy-Szekeres, G., Esguerra, M., Mamyrbekov, A., Munk, C., Keser, G. M. & Gloriam, D. E. GPCRdb in 2021: integrating GPCR sequence, structure   and function. Nucleic Acids Res. (in the press). 16. Langenhan, T. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': 'Adhesion G proteincoupled receptorscandidate metabotropic mechanosensors and novel drug targets. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 126 (Suppl. 6),  516 (2019). 17. Knierim, A. B. etal. Genetic basis of functional variability in adhesion G protein-coupled  receptors. Sci. Rep. 9, 11036 (2019). 18. Milligan, G. A day in the life of a G protein-coupled receptor: the contribution to function of G protein-coupled receptor dimerization. Br. J. Pharmacol. 153 (Suppl 1), S216S229 (2008). 19. Berchiche, Y. A. & Sakmar, T. P. CXC chemokine receptor 3 alternative splice variants  selectively activate different signaling pathways. Mol. Pharmacol. 90, 483495 (2016). 20. Hirata, T., Ushikubi, F., Kakizuka, A., Okuma, M. & Narumiya, S. Two thromboxane A2 receptor isoforms in human platelets. Opposite coupling to adenylyl cyclase with  different sensitivity to Arg60 to Leu mutation. J. Clin. Invest. 97, 949956 (1996). 21. Venkatakrishnan, A. J. etal. Structured and disordered facets of the GPCR fold. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 6, 'content': '27, 129137 (2014). 22. Martin, C. B. P. etal. RNA splicing and editing modulation of 5-HT 2C receptor function:  relevance to anxiety and aggression in VGV mice. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 656665 (2013). 23. Grosse, R., Schneberg, T., Schultz, G. & Gudermann, T. Inhibition of gonadotropin-   releasing hormone receptor signaling by expression of a splice variant of the human  receptor. Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 13051318 (1997). 24. Marrone, G. F. etal. Truncated mu opioid GPCR variant involvement in opioid-dependent  and opioid-independent pain modulatory systems within the CNS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 7, 'content': '656 | Nature | Vol 587 | 26 November 2020 Article25. Howlett, A. C. etal. Endocannabinoid tone versus constitutive activity of cannabinoid  receptors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 163, 13291343 (2011). 26. Finan, B. etal. Reappraisal of GIP pharmacology for metabolic diseases. Trends Mol. Med. 22, 359376 (2016). 27. Schwarzschild, M. A., Agnati, L., Fuxe, K., Chen, J. F. & Morelli, M. Targeting adenosine A2A receptors in Parkinsons disease. Trends Neurosci. 29, 647654 (2006). 28. Canela-Xandri, O., Rawlik, K. & Tenesa, A. An atlas of genetic associations in UK Biobank. Nat. Genet. 50, 15931599 (2018). 29. MacKenzie, A. E. etal. The antiallergic mast cell stabilizers lodoxamide and bufrolin as the first high and equipotent agonists of human and rat GPR35. Mol. Pharmacol. 85, 91104  (2014). 30. Zhao, P. etal. Targeting of the orphan receptor GPR35 by pamoic acid: a potent activator  of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and -arrestin2 with antinociceptive activity. Mol.  Pharmacol. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 7, 'content': '78, 560568 (2010). 31. Thal, D. M., Glukhova, A., Sexton, P. M. & Christopoulos, A. Structural insights into G-protein-coupled receptor allostery. Nature 559, 4553 (2018). 32. Shin, H. etal. Recent advances in RNA therapeutics and RNA delivery systems based on nanoparticles. Adv. Ther. 1, 1800065 (2018).33. Adhikari, S., Sharma, S., Ahn, S. B. & Baker, M. S. In silico peptide repertoire of human olfactory receptor proteome on high-stringency mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 18, 41174123 (2019). 34. Insel, P. A. etal. G protein-coupled Receptor (GPCR) expression in native cells: novel endoGPCRs as physiologic regulators and therapeutic targets. Mol. Pharmacol. 88,   181187 (2015). 35. Wang, D. etal. A deep proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas of 29 healthy human  tissues. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8503 (2019). 36. Enge, M. etal. Single-cell analysis of human pancreas reveals transcriptional signatures of aging and somatic mutation patterns. Cell  171, 321330 (2017). 37. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 7, 'content': 'De Mei, C., Ramos, M., Iitaka, C. & Borrelli, E. Getting specialized: presynaptic and postsynaptic dopamine D2 receptors. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 9, 5358 (2009). 38. Kopelman, N. M., Lancet, D. & Yanai, I. Alternative splicing and gene duplication are inversely correlated evolutionary mechanisms. Nat. Genet. 37, 588589 (2005). Publishers note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Methods No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size.  The experiments were not randomized and the investigators were  not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assess - ment.HEK293 cells were purchased from ATCC (CRL-1573). HEK293T  cells were purchased from ATCC (CRL-3216). Cells were authenticated  by ATCC through morphological analysis and karyotyping. These cell lines were not specifically tested for mycoplasma contamination, but  routine Hoechst staining shows no evidence of contamination. No  commonly misidentified cell lines were used in this study. Transcriptomics, sequence and pharmacology data In order to collect information for all human GPCRs, we obtained  GPCRdb names, Uniprot identifiers and receptor-class annotations  for all GPCRs in the GPCRdb15 database via the representational state  transfer (REST) application programme interface (API) and with the  help of the jsonlite R package. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'We then used those Uniprot identifiers to obtain associated information from Ensembl 39 (GRCh37 assembly)  using the R BioMart interface40. Specifically, we collected HUGO Gene  Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) symbols, gene and transcript iden - tification codes, transcript biotype and signal peptide annotations  and protein sequences for all GPCR transcripts in Ensembl. Only those  transcripts belonging to the protein coding biotype (that is, excluding  short and long non-coding and nonsense-mediated decay transcripts,  pseudogenes and so on) and with a preserved signal peptide (for those  receptors with one annotated) were kept for further analysis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Using the  Ensembl transcript identification codes, we then used transcript-level  transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) data (GTEx_Analysis_2016-01-15_ v7_RSEMv1.2.22_transcript_tpm.txt) from the GTEx14 Portal to filter for  GPCR transcripts detected by TruSeq.v1 technology (as annotated in  the database in GTEx_v7_Annotations_SampleAttributesDS.txt) and  expressed at levels of one or more TPM in at least four different GTEx  donors (using donor annotations found in GTEx_v7_Annotations_Sub - jectPhenotypesDS.txt). Please refer to the original GTEx publications  for further information on RNA-sequence (RNA-seq) quality control and analysis 14,41. The expression cut-off was chosen both to match the cut-off  used in another publication from the GTEx consortium (which focused  on the analysis of splice variants42) and to ensure that any non-reference  isoform studied would have a high likelihood to be translated into  protein and have an effect when combinatorially coexpressed with the  reference isoform. In parallel, the donor cut-off was chosen after analys - ing which was the lowest number of donors that would still capture all  known reference receptor isoforms (in our case, four donors for the  reference ADGRB2 receptor). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Furthermore, in order to analyse whether  the number of isoforms per receptor was associated with any receptor  pharmacological features, we used the jsonlite R package to query the  REST API from the Guide to Pharmacology43 database. This allowed the  GPCR HGNC symbols to be linked to annotations on receptor natural/ endogenous ligands and transduction mechanisms. Structural fingerprints and functional annotation For receptors with more than one isoform, we analysed the structural  segments that differed between reference and non-reference isoforms.  To do so, we used the protein sequences from Ensembl to obtain a  sequence alignment using MUSCLE44 with default parameters (gap  extension set at 1.0). In the case of receptors with transcripts that  code for the same amino-acid sequence (that is, with just the 5- or  3-untranslated region (UTR) being different), we retained one rep - resentative sequence only. We also used GPCRdb receptor names to  download information on receptor segments associated with every  receptor residue from GPCRdb45 as detailed in the previous section. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'For  each multiple sequence alignment, we found the Ensembl transcript  corresponding to the structurally annotated sequence in GPCRdb and  considered it our reference receptor sequence; receptors for which none of the isoforms could be assigned to a GPCRdb reference (FFAR4,  GPR111, GPR107, GPRC5C, LPHN3, LRB4R2 and OR51E1) were excluded  from further analysis. For non-reference receptor isoforms, we used the  multiple sequence alignment to determine which GPCRdb-annotated  receptor segments were the same as in the reference and which were  different or absent in order to obtain a structural fingerprint . Each  fingerprint contains information about the 16 structural segments  that constitute a GPCR, and whether they are conserved with those in  the GPCRdb-annotated reference or they differ (that is, have a different  sequence or are missing). In this manner, we generated a 16-dimensional  vector with 1s and 0s, denoting conserved or altered segments, for  each isoform. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'In the graphical representation of these fingerprints  (see Fig.1 ), conserved segments are shown as dark circles, and vary - ing or missing segments as grey circles. To ensure that our analysis  was centred on isoforms that were anchored to the membrane, we  excluded non-reference isoforms that did not have at least one trans- membrane structural segment in common with their reference isoform.  The resulting non-reference isoforms were classified as topologically  preserved when all receptor transmembrane segments of the refer - ence isoform were preserved, and topologically truncated when at  least one annotated transmembrane segment was altered (missing  or differing) in comparison with the reference isoform. To assess the  functional importance of the non-reference isoforms detected in GTEx,  we performed a comprehensive literature search for each receptor with  multiple isoforms in the PubMed database, and collected all references  in which a human non-reference isoform matching one of our analysed  transcripts had been functionally characterized. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'Tissue expression and tissue-expression signatures Using tissue annotations for the transcript-level TPM data from the  GTEx Portal (GTEx_v7_Annotations_SampleAttributesDS.txt), we first  calculated the number of receptors and the mean number of isoforms  per receptor in all 30 tissues analysed in the GTEx project, considering  expression data from all available donors. We also calculated the mean  number of isoforms per receptor and tissue on a donor-by-donor basis.  The tissues include: brain, nerve, pituitary, adrenal gland, thyroid,  blood vessel, blood, spleen, heart, muscle, bladder, kidney, salivary  gland, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, liver, pancreas, colon,  adipose tissue, skin, lung, breast, ovary, fallopian tube, uterus, vagina,  cervix uteri, prostate and testis. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'In the case of transcripts that code  for the same isoform (that is, synonymous transcripts, with the same  protein sequence but different 5- or 3-UTRs), we considered the  protein isoform to be expressed in all tissues where the synonymous  transcripts had been detected. To calculate the most prevalent isoform  per receptor in each tissue, we selected the isoform with the highest  median expression considering all GTEx donor samples from that tis-sue. For the 136 receptors with more than 1 isoform, we also obtained receptor-centric N30 binary matrices representing the presence or  absence of receptor isoforms in different tissues considering all donors,  where N is the number of unique isoforms of a particular receptor and  30 is the number of tissues analysed in GTEx. These matrices were then  used to calculate the number of unique tissue-expression signatures  per receptorthat is, the number of unique combinations of receptor  isoforms that are found across the different human tissues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 8, 'content': 'CNR1 cloning and pharmacological characterization Complementary DNA sequences for human CNR1 isoforms 1 and 2 were  used to generate gene blocks (Integrated DNA Technologies), which  were cloned into a pcDNA3.1 backbone with a SNAP tag using BamHI  and XbaI sites. The human CNR1 reference isoform was cloned into a  pcDNA3.1 backbone with an influenza hemagglutinin signal sequence  and a Flag tag or SNAP tag using AgeI and XbaI sites. A mixed popula- tion of stable HEK293 cells expressing the Flag-tagged CNR1 refer - ence isoform was generated using selection with geneticin. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Articlesupplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and maintained at  37C and 5% CO2 (routine Hoechst staining showed no evidence of con - tamination). The Flag-tagged CNR1 cell line was transfected with 300ng  SNAP-tagged CNR1 reference isoform as a control or SNAP-tagged  CNR1 non-reference isoform 1 or 2 and 300ng of the cAMP FRET sensor  ICUE3 (a gift from J. Zhang) (Addgene plasmid 6162246) using Effectene  according to the manufacturers standards, and incubated for 5h at  37C. Cells were imaged 4872h after transfection. Before FRET experi - ments, cells were pretreated with 500M of the phosphodiesterase  inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) for 2h. Before imaging,  cells were labelled with Alexa-568 (Molecular Probes catalogue number  A20184)-conjugated M1 antibody (Millipore Sigma F3040) at a dilution  of 1/1,000 and 500nM SNAP-surface Alexa-Fluor 647 (New England  BioLabs S9136S), for 10min at 37C to label Flag- and SNAP-tagged  receptors, respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Cells were imaged at greater than 50% confluence in L-15  media supplemented with 1% FBS and 500M IBMX at 37C in a  temperature-controlled imaging chamber (In Vivo Scientific). Cells  were imaged on a TiE inverted microscope (Nikon) with a 60, numeri - cal aperture (NA) 1.49, Apo-TIRF objective (Nikon) with an iXon-888  Life electron-multiplying charge coupled device (EMCCD) camera  (Andor). Cells were selected for imaging on the basis of their expres - sion of both a Flag-tagged and a SNAP-tagged isoform as well as the  FRET sensor. Initial confocal slice images were acquired to record  receptor expression. Relative expression of Flag and SNAP isoforms  was quantified using ImageJ. Briefly, the SNAP channel was used to  generate a mask defining the membrane receptor region of the cell. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': ' This mask was applied to both the Flag and the SNAP channels, and  the mean fluorescence intensity of these regions was measured and  expressed as a ratio, normalized to the mean ratio of the control refer - ence plus reference condition on a given day to account for variability  in labelling and dye/antibody aliquots between experiments. Cells were  imaged in widefield imaging mode for cyan fluorescent protein (CFP;  405nm excitation, 400nm emission filter), for YFP or FRET (405nm  excitation, 514nm emission filter) and for the SNAP-tagged isoform  (647nm excitation, 700nm emission filter) every 30s with 5 frames of  baseline before addition of 5M forskolin (Fsk) to stimulate adenylyl  cyclase activity. For experiments in which cells were pretreated with  Rimonabant or AM4113, cells were pretreated with antagonist for 5min,  and imaged over this time period, before the addition of forskolin. In  experiments addressing the effect of isoform expression on responses  to Rimonabant, cells were similarly imaged every 30s with 5 frames of  baseline before addition of 500nM Fsk, followed by addition of 10M  Rimonabant after 5min. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Images were exported in 16-bit tiff files and  analysed using ImageJ to calculate the change in CFP/FRET ratio in each  cell, as described47. All data were analysed using GraphPad Prism 7. All  data points representing individual cells were normalized to the mean  of the control condition for each day, to account for experimental  variability between days. All data were analysed by one-way analysis  of variance (ANOVA; =0.05), with pairwise comparisons made using  either Sidaks or Dunnetts multiple comparisons. ANOVA P -values and  those of associated post-hoc tests are provided in the figure legends  (*P<0.05, ** P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001). GIPR cloning and pharmacological characterization Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplicons of the GIPR reference or  GIPR isoform 1 were ligated into either a pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc backbone  (which includes the signal peptide from the murine serotonin receptor  5-HT3R), or a pcDNA3.1()Nluc backbone to generate NlucGIPR or  GIPRNluc constructs, respectively. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'All cloning results were confirmed  by Sanger sequencing (University of Cambridge). Flag-tagged reference  GIPR was supplied by S. Al-Sabah (University of Kuwait). GRK5 and  YFP-tagged -arrestin-1 and -2 were supplied by K. Caron (University  of North Carolina at Chapel Hill). HEK293T cells (from the American  Type Culture Collection, ATCC48) were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Gibco), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Sigma) and 1% antibiotic  antimycotic solution (Sigma), and maintained at 37C with 5% CO2 in a  humidified environment.Transfections were performed using either  Fugene HD (Promega) at a 1/3 w/v ratio of DNA/Fugene HD, in accord- ance with the manufacturers instructions, or polyethylenimine (PEI,  Polysciences Inc.) and 150mM NaCl at a 1/6 w/v ratio of DNA/PEI. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'To measure cell-surface expression, we transfected HEK293T cells  with pcDNA3.1(),NlucGIPR reference plus pcDNA3.1(), NlucGIPR  isoform 1 plus pcDNA3.1(), NlucGIPR reference plus NlucGIPR iso - form 1, FlagGIPR reference plus pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc, or FlagGIPR  reference plus NlucGIPR isoform 1 at a 1/1 ratio. After 48h, 350,000  cells were washed three times in fluorescence-activated cell sorting  (FACS) buffer (phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 1%  bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.03% sodium azide) before and after  incubation with the appropriate antibody for 1h at room temperature in  the dark; rat allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated anti-Flag monoclonal  antibody, diluted 1/100 (BioLegend); rabbit anti-Nluc polyclonal anti - body, diluted 1/100 (Promega); or goat APC-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG  polyclonal antibody 31984, diluted 1/150 (Thermofisher). APC intensity  was measured using a BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences)  at an excitation wavelength of 633nm and emission of 660nm. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Data  were normalized to the mean APC intensity of cells transfected with  pcDNA3.1() as 0% and NlucGIPR reference plus pcDNA3.1() (where  expression of NlucGIPR was assessed), FlagGIPR reference plus  pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc (where expression of the FlagGIPR reference  was assessed) or NlucGIPR isoform 1 plus pcDNA3.1() (where expres - sion of the NlucGIPR isoform 1 was assessed) as 100%. For assays of cAMP accumulation and (Ca2+)i mobilization, HEK293T  cells were transfected for 48 h with GIPRNluc reference plus  pcDNA3.1(), GIPRNluc isoform 1 plus pcDNA3.1() or GIPRNluc refer - ence plus GIPRNluc isoform 1, at a 1/1 ratio. GIP (GIP(142))-mediated  cAMP accumulation was measured after stimulation for 30min, in the  presence of 500M IBMX, using a LANCE cAMP detection kit (Perkin  Elmer) and a Berthold Mithras LB 940 multimode microplate reader,  as described49,50. Forskolin (100M) was used as a positive control.  Mobilization of (Ca2+)i was measured as described49. GIP(142) was  added robotically using a BD Pathway 855 high-content bio-imager,  with images captured roughly every 0.5s for 80s. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'The image series  were processed using Fiji (Is Just) Image J to correct for background  fluorescence of the region of interest and to determine the maximum  intensity to generate concentrationresponse curves. Ionomycin  (10M) was used as a positive control. To measure the total, combined (GIPR reference plus GIPR isoform 1)   recruitment of -arrestin-1/2, HEK293T cells were transfected with  YFP-labelled -arrestin1/2, GRK5, and either GIPRNluc reference plus  pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc, GIPRNluc isoform 1 plus pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc  or GIPRNluc reference plus GIPRNluc isoform 1 at a 5/4/1/1 ratio and  grown overnight. To measure the recruitment of -arrestin-1/2 to either  GIPR reference or GIPR isoform 1 in isolation, HEK293T cells were trans - fected with -arrestin1/2YFP, GRK5 and either GIPRNluc reference  plus pcDNA3.1(+)sigNluc, GIPRNluc isoform 1 plus pcDNA3.1(+) sigNluc, GIPRNluc reference plus NlucGIPR isoform 1 or GIPRNluc  isoform 1 plus NlucGIPR reference at a 5/4/1/1 ratio and grown over - night. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 9, 'content': 'Fifty thousand cells per well were seeded into poly-l -lysine-coated  white 96-well plates (Perkin Elmer) in reduced-serum medium (MEM  plus 2% FBS plus 1% antibiotic antimycotic solution). The following  day, cells were incubated with coelenterazine-h (5mM, diluted in PBS  containing 0.49mM MgCl2.6H2O, 0.9mM CaCl2.2H2O and 0.1% BSA) for  10min. The bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) ratio  (530nm/460nm) was measured using a Berthold Mithras LB 940 mul - timode microplate reader every minute for 60minutes after addition  of GIP(142), and data were corrected to vehicle-treated samples. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'data were corrected to vehicle-treated samples. All data were analysed  using GraphPad Prism 8.4. For assays of cAMP accumulation, (Ca2+)i mobilization and  -arrestin-1/2 recruitment, data were fitted to obtain concentration response curves using a three-parameter logistic equation (for pEC50  and Emax values) and were normalized to the response of the GIPR   reference. Responses of GIPR reference and GIPR isoform 1 were deter - mined to be statistically different using a Students unpaired t -test. For  assays of cell-surface expression, significance was determined using a  MannWhitney test. To construct the radar plots, Emax or pEC50 values  for each condition were subtracted from the GIPRNluc reference to  produce Emax or pEC50 values. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Values for the log intrinsic relative activ - ity (logRAi)4,51 were calculated relative to cells expressing GIPRNluc  reference alone for each signalling pathway (cAMP accumulation, (Ca2+)i  release and -arrestin-1/2 recruitment) using the following equation:   E ElogR A= logEC EC ref+iso1,refpat h ma x,ref+iso1 50,ref 50,ref+iso1m ax,ref Where the Emax and EC50 values were calculated by fitting the data to  the three-parameter logistic equation. GPR35 cloning and pharmacological characterization A sensor system comprising the GPR35 reference protein fused to a  fragment of the G13 subunit is described fully in ref. 52. We generated  an equivalent GPR35 isoform 1 with G13 sensor by replacing the GPR35  reference with GPR35 isoform 1, which contains an additional 31 amino  acids at the N terminus but is otherwise identical in sequence to the  reference. These two constructs were transfected transiently into  HEK293T cells using polyethylenimine (linear molecular weight 25,000)  2 days before experiments. Thirty minutes before the assay, cells were  washed with Hanks buffered saline solution containing 10mM HEPES  and incubated in the same buffer at 37C. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Because BRET provides a  ratiometric signal and each sensor is a single polypeptide, outcomes  are anticipated to be independent of expression levels, but we assessed  this directly by recording levels of substrate-induced luciferase activ - ity. HEK293T cells were transfected transiently to coexpress either  eYFP-tagged GPR35 reference or eYFP-tagged GPR35 isoform 1 with  -arrestin 2 tagged with nanoluciferase5254. Agonist-induced proximity  between the eYFP and nanoluciferase generated BRET upon addition  of the luciferase substrate colenterazine-h. Lodoxamide, pamoic acid  and zaprinast were purchased from commercial sources. Drug target and genetic association data To assess how many receptors with more than one isoform are known  drug targets, we used information on 474 FDA-approved drugs matched  to their GPCR targets as available in the literature13. In addition, we  identified phosphorylation sites annotated in reference isoforms that  were not retained in non-reference receptor isoforms by analysing data  from PhosphoSitePlus55. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'To assess whether non-reference isoforms  could be associated with clinical phenotypes of pharmacological inter - est, we analysed SNPs in the human population that were statistically  significantly associated with phenotypes in the Gene Atlas28 database.  We considered only those associations that have high statistical sig - nificance (P<11010) and involve clinically determined phenotypes  (excluding self-reported and generic phenotypes). We then mapped the  resulting SNPs to the sequences of non-reference receptor isoforms. For  all of the analysed GPCRs, we only considered phenotype associations  if they uniquely mapped to SNPs in the non-reference isoform. Finally,  we assessed which alternative isoforms could represent druggable  targets and might offer isoform-level tissue selectivity. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'To do that, we  used the multiple sequence alignments from the previous steps to  filter for non-reference isoforms with a different sequence in at least  one extracellular segment (that is, in the N terminus or ECL1, ECL2 or  ECL3). We then filtered for non-reference isoforms that have a different tissue distribution compared with the reference isoform by using the  previously computed receptor-centric binary expression matrices. To  do so, we used the previously obtained binary tissue-expression finger - prints (that is, the strings of 1 (expressed) or 0 (not expressed) of length  30 corresponding to the 30 GTEx tissues) for each receptor isoform to  select those non-reference isoforms with expression fingerprints that  differed from their respective reference isoform. Analysis of mass-spectrometry data We analysed the available mass-spectrometry (MS) data on GPCR iso - forms at the protein level by using a brain-derived MS data set (Proteom - ics Identification Database (PRIDE) accession number PXD0079985).  Using these data, we mined for peptides that uniquely match one of  the isoforms detected in brain tissue in the GTEx data set. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'We used a  total of 105 MS runs from brain tissue to identify potential peptides  associated with GPCR proteins (at a false discovery rate (FDR) of less  than 0.01 using the target/decoy strategy). We describe the detailed  parameters for database search in ref. 56. In brief, all 105 MS/MS raw data  files were searched against a composite target/decoy database57 using  the JUMP hybrid search engine58. The target database was generated  by combining the SwissProt human core database (20,368 entries) and  manually curated GPCR isoforms (1,033 entries), and the decoy data- base was produced by reversing the target protein sequences. The FDR  was estimated by the number of decoy matches (nd) and the number of  target matches (nt), according to the equation: FDR=nd/nt. Putative  peptidespectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by mass accuracy,  grouped by precursor-ion charge state, and further filtered by JUMP  scores (Jscore  and Jn) to reach the expected FDR. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'All GPCR transcripts  with two or more isoforms as detected in the GTEx brain-tissue tran - scriptome data set were filtered to obtain isoforms with unique protein  sequences. These transcripts were then matched with the brain MS  hits to identify receptor isoforms at the protein level. We also analysed  data from an independent MS study consisting of 50 MS runs from 29  healthy human tissues35. Raw MS data were downloaded from the FTP  site ftp://ftp.pride.ebi.ac.uk/pride/data/archive/2019/07/PXD010154.  All 1,557 MS data files were searched against the same composite target/ decoy database using the comet engine to increase search speed59.  Major parameters included precursor mass tolerance (10p.p.m.) and  product-ion mass tolerance (0.01Da), full trypticity, dynamic mass shift  for methionine oxidation (+15.99491), maximal missed cleavage (n =2),  and maximal modification sites (n=3). Putative PSMs were filtered by  mass accuracy and comet scores (Xcorr and Cn) to reduce the protein  FDR to less than 0.01. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'A total of 299,600 peptides were identified with  FDRs of less than 1%, including 4,182 peptides that map to the detected  GPCR isoforms. These peptides were then filtered to select only those  that would uniquely discriminate a particular GPCR isoform by search - ing the previously obtained isoform sequences for unique hits. Finally,  we used ProteomicsDB60 (www.proteomicsdb.org) to systematically  explore all GPCRs for which more than one isoform had been detected  using their REST API. To do that, we used isoform-specific Uniprot  identifiers to identify isoforms that had peptides uniquely matching  to them (ISUNIQUE=1). Cell-line and single-cell RNA-seq analysis We used RNA-seq data deposited in BioProject61 (accession number  PRJNA183192) to analyse the receptor transcripts expressed in 11  commonly used human cell lines (HEK293, SHSY5Y , RT-4, PC-3, MCF- 7, Hep-G2, HeLa, CACO-2, A-549, U-251MG and A-431) derived from 10  different human tissues. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 10, 'content': 'Following the analysis pipeline used for the  GTEx transcript-level expression data, Sequence Read Archive (SRA;  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) files for all cell-line experiments  were downloaded and converted to FASTQ files with fastq-dump. Next,  transcript-level information was obtained using RNA-Seq with Expec - tation Maximization (RSEM)62, with the GRCh37 human assembly as  a reference. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Articleexpression threshold (at least 1TPM) were considered for comparison.  The same analysis was repeated for a single-cell RNA-seq data set from  healthy human pancreas36 (BioProject accession number PRJNA322355).  SRA files for all single-cell experiments were downloaded and converted  to FASTQ files with fastq-dump. Again, transcript-level information was  obtained with RSEM62 using the GRCh37 human assembly as a reference.  GPCR transcripts expressed over the previously defined expression  threshold (at least 1TPM) were considered for comparison and grouped  according to inferred cell types as annotated by the authors of the  original publication61 in BioProject. Data visualization and analysis All graphics were created using RStudio version 1.1.419 and the ggplot  package, as well as the UpSetR, ggalluvial and snakeplotter packages  as appropriate. Unless stated otherwise, all calculations, analyses and  data processing were performed using custom-written scripts in R. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'All  illustrations were made using Adobe Illustrator CC 22.0.1. Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in theNature  Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper. Data availability All data accessed from public repositoriesnamely the GTEx data- base (www.gtexportal.org, version 7), GPCRdb (https://gpcrdb.org),  Ensembl ( www.ensembl.org, GRCh37 assembly), Uniprot ( www.   uniprot.org), Protein DataBank (PDB; www.rcsb.org), PRIDE ( www.ebi. ac.uk/pride, accession numbers PXD0079985 and PXD010154), Prot- eomicsDB ( www.proteomicsdb.org), Guide to Pharmacology ( www. guidetopharmacology.org), GeneAtlas (geneatlas.roslin.ed.ac.uk)  and BioProject ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject, accession num - bers PRJNA183192 and PRJNA322355)are detailed in the Methods.  We declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are avail - able within the paper, via the GPCRdb (https://gpcrdb.org/protein/ isoforms) and in the Supplementary Information files.   39. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Zerbino, D. R. etal. Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46 (D1), D754D761 (2018). 40. Durinck, S., Spellman, P. T., Birney, E. & Huber, W. Mapping identifiers for the integration of  genomic datasets with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nat. Protoc. 4, 11841191  (2009). 41. The GTEx Consortium. The Genotype-tissue expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 348, 648660 (2015). 42. Saha, A. etal. Co-expression networks reveal the tissue-specific regulation of transcription and splicing. Genome Res. 27, 18431858 (2017). 43. Harding, S. D. etal. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2018: updates and  expansion to encompass the new guide to IMMUNOPHARMACOLOGY. Nucleic Acids Res.  46 (D1), D1091D1106 (2018). 44. Edgar, R. C. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high  throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 17921797 (2004). 45. Isberg, V. etal. Generic GPCR residue numbersaligning topology maps while minding  the gaps. Trends Pharmacol. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Sci. 36, 2231 (2015). 46. DiPilato, L. M. & Zhang, J. The role of membrane microdomains in shaping  2-adrenergic  receptor-mediated cAMP dynamics. Mol. Biosyst. 5, 832837 (2009). 47. Weinberg, Z. Y., Zajac, A. S., Phan, T., Shiwarski, D. J. & Puthenveedu, M. A. Sequence-specific regulation of endocytic lifetimes modulates arrestin-mediated  signaling at the  opioid receptor. Mol. Pharmacol. 91, 416427 (2017). 48. Bailey, S. etal. Interactions between RAMP2 and CRF receptors: the effect of receptor  subtypes, splice variants and cell context. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. 1861 ,   9971003 (2019). 49. Weston, C. etal. Receptor activity-modifying protein-directed G protein signaling specificity for the calcitonin gene-related peptide family of receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 291,  2192521944 (2016).50. Knight, A. etal. Discovery of novel adenosine receptor agonists that exhibit subtype selectivity. J. Med. Chem. 59, 947964 (2016). 51. Griffin, M. T., Figueroa, K. W., Liller, S. & Ehlert, F. J. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Estimation of agonist activity at G protein-coupled receptors: analysis of M 2 muscarinic receptor signaling through Gi/o,Gs,  and G15. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 321, 11931207 (2007). 52. Mackenzie, A. E. etal. Receptor selectivity between the G proteins G12 and G13 is  defined by a single leucine-to-isoleucine variation. FASEB J. 33, 50055017 (2019). 53. Milligan, G. Orthologue selectivity and ligand bias: translating the pharmacology of  GPR35. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 32, 317325 (2011). 54. Jenkins, L. etal. Agonist activation of the G protein-coupled receptor GPR35 involves transmembrane domain III and is transduced via G 13 and -arrestin-2. Br. J. Pharmacol.  162, 733748 (2011). 55. Hornbeck, P. V. etal. PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: mutations, PTMs and recalibrations. Nucleic  Acids Res. 43, D512D520 (2015). 56. Bai, B. etal. Deep multilayer brain proteomics identifies molecular networks in Alzheimers   disease progression. Neuron 105, 975991 (2020). 57. Peng, J., Elias, J. E., Thoreen, C. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'C., Licklider, L. J. & Gygi, S. P. Evaluation of multidimensional chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC-MS/MS) for large-scale protein analysis: the yeast proteome. J. Proteome Res. 2, 4350  (2003). 58. Wang, X. etal. JUMP: a tag-based database search tool for peptide identification with  high sensitivity and accuracy. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 36633673 (2014). 59. Eng, J. K., Jahan, T. A. & Hoopmann, M. R. Comet: an open-source MS/MS sequence  database search tool. Proteomics 13, 2224 (2013). 60. Samaras, P. etal. ProteomicsDB: a multi-omics and multi-organism resource for life science research. Nucleic Acids Res. 48 (D1), D1153D1163 (2020). 61. Barrett, T. etal. BioProject and BioSample databases at NCBI: facilitating capture and organization of metadata. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D57D63 (2012). 62. Li, B. & Dewey, C. N. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323 (2011). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Acknowledgements We thank A. Hummer, R. Henderson, F. Heidenreich, W. R. Orchard and   E. Villanueva for reading the manuscript. M.M.-S. and M.M.B. acknowledge the UK Medical Research Council (MRC; grant number MC_U105185859) for support. M.M.-S. is a Wolfson  College Junior Research Fellow and has been supported by a Federation of European Biochemical Societies Long-Term Fellowship and a Marie Skodowska-Curie Individual  Fellowship from the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme  under grant agreement 832620. D.M. acknowledges the support of the Swiss National Science foundation (SNF) under grant P2ELP3_18910. J.P. is partially supported by National Institutes of  Health (NIH) grant R01AG053987. X.W. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'is partially supported by a pilot grant from the NIH  Center of Biomedical Research Excellence (COBRE) for epigenomics of development and disease, and a pilot grant from the Core National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Center of Excellence in Omics, Systems Genetics, and the Addictome. M.A.P. was supported by NIH  grant GM117425 and National Science Foundation (NSF) grant 1935926. M.H. and G.L. were  supported by an MRC confidence in concept award (MC_PC_17156). A.P. was supported by a UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC)-iCase studentship   (BB/JO14540/1), co-funded with AstraZeneca. D.E.G. acknowledges the Lundbeck Foundation (R313-2019-526) and Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF17OC0031226) for financial support. C.M.  acknowledges the Lundbeck Foundation (R218-2016-1266). S.E.C. was supported by an NSF  Graduate Research Fellowship under grant DGE 1256260. G.M. and A.B.T. were supported by BBSRC grants BB/P000649/1 and BB/P00069X/1, respectively. M.M.B. is a Lister Institute  Fellow and is also supported by the European Research Council (ERC; ERC-COG-2015-682414),  the Novo Nordisk Foundation Challenge Grant (ADIPOSIGN) and the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (ALSAC). Author contributions M.M.-S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'collected data, wrote scripts and performed all of the  computational analyses. S.E.C. and M.A.P. experimentally characterized the pharmacology of  CNR1 isoforms. M.H., A.P. and G.L. experimentally characterized the pharmacology of GIPR  isoforms. T.Q., A.E.M., G.M. and A.B.T. experimentally characterized the pharmacology of  GPR35 isoforms. D.M. collected data and carried out genomics analyses. C.M. and D.E.G.  designed and implemented the GPCRdb receptor-isoform browser. X.W. and J.P. collected  data and analysed MS data. D.E.G. helped with aspects of data interpretation. M.M.-S. and M.M.B. designed the project, analysed and interpreted the results, and wrote the manuscript.  All authors read, and provided comments on, the draft. M.M.-S. led the project. M.M.B. initiated, managed and set the direction of research. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.Additional information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2888-2 . ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 11, 'content': 'Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.M.-S. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 12, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 1 | Isoform diversity in GPCRs. a, Alternative  transcriptional start or termination sites, together with alternative splicing,  can generate non-reference receptor isoforms (that is, isoforms with sequences that are different to those of the GPCRdb-annotated receptor), with  altered structural and signalling properties. b , Analysis pipeline combining  GTEx isoform-level data with GPCRdb, Ensembl and UniProt annotations to  filter for highly expressed, protein-coding isoforms. Isoforms with truncated signal peptides, or those without at least one conserved transmembrane helix compared with the reference isoform, are not considered (seeMethods).  c, Number of isoforms in different receptor classes (left) and grouped by the  type of natural ligand of each receptor (right). d , Number of isoforms per  receptor, grouped by each receptors coupling partners (G-protein subunits),  as annotated in the IUPHAR/BPS Guide To Pharmacology database ( www. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 12, 'content': 'guidetopharmacology.org ). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Article Extended Data Fig. 2 | Classification of receptor isoforms according to  topology.  Structural classification of non-reference isoforms. Isoforms are  considered topologically preserved if all transmembrane (TM) segments are conserved in sequence with respect to the reference isoform; this includes  receptor isoforms with changes (including deletions and unique isoform  sequences) in the receptor N- and C termini, as well as in intracellular and extracellular loops (ECLs) and the helix 8 (H8) segment. Isoforms are classified as topologically truncated if at least one TM segment is altered (that is, is partially or totally missing or has a different sequence to the reference isoform). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 13, 'content': 'Both topologically preserved and truncated isoforms can either have an alternative sequence in the segments that differ from the reference (unique  sequence, represented as solid coloured lines) or lack parts of those segments  altogether, thus representing a shorter version of the reference sequence (non-unique, represented as dotted coloured lines).', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 14, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 3 | Non-reference isoforms with missing  phosphorylation motifs.  a, Analysis of PhosphoSitePlus ( https:/ /www. phosphosite.org/ ) phosphorylation motifs with annotated regulatory  function in non-reference receptor isoforms. Left, frequency of phosphosites  related to regulatory effects (for example,receptor trafficking and interaction)  that are found to be missing in non-reference isoforms. Right, examples of the potential consequences of this lack of regulation on receptor function for somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSR2), thromboxane A2 receptor (TA2R) and adenosine receptor A2A (AA2AR). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 15, 'content': 'Article Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 16, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 4 | Tissue distribution of different isoforms. a, Binary  representation of the presence or absence of particular receptor isoforms in  the 30 different GTEx tissues according to their classification as reference isoform (grey), topologically preserved isoform (dark blue) or topologically  truncated isoform (light blue). This figure shows that every tissue expresses all  these types of isoforms, and that non-reference isoforms can be consistently found in multiple tissues. b , Heatmap showing whether the most prevalent  isoform for a receptor in a particular tissue is a reference (grey), topologically preserved (dark blue) or topologically truncated (light blue) receptor isoform. The most prevalent isoform in a particular tissue is considered to be the one with the highest median expression (in TPM). Only tissues in which more than  one isoform was expressed have been retained and represented. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 16, 'content': 'c , Mean number of isoforms expressed per receptor for every GTEx donor-tissue  combination. All available combinations of donor-tissue expression had a mean number of isoforms per receptor of more than one (that is, reference and non-reference isoforms are coexpressed in each GTEx donor-tissue  combination). Empty cells (white) represent donor-tissue combinations with  no expression data. For the underlying data in a c, see Supplementary Table2.  d, For receptors with multiple isoforms, two scenarios are possible. In one  scenario, all receptor isoforms could be consistently expressed in human tissues, resulting in a uniform expression pattern. In a second scenario, different isoform combinations may be expressed in different tissues, resulting in a complex expression pattern. In order to assess this, we calculated  the number of tissue-expression signatures per receptor (see Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 17, 'content': 'Article Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 5 | Characterization of the pharmacological and  signalling effects of the coexpression of different isoforms of CNR1 and GIPR.  a, Alignment of the N-terminal segments of the reference and non- reference CNR1 isoforms. Regions that are missing orvary in isoforms 1 and 2  are highlighted in blue. b , Left, change in mean CFP/FRET ratios induced by  5M forskolin (Fsk) in HEK293 cells. Data from cells from the same coverslip  expressing (grey line) and not expressing (black line) the CNR1 reference isoform are shown. Cells expressing CNR1 show a lower Fsk response, as expected for G i signalling. CFP/FRET ratios were obtained in HEK293 cells  expressing the CNR1 reference isoform (+CNR1, n=30 cells) or not (CNR1 n=40 cells). Right, the baseline ratios are not significantly different ( P=0.527  by unpaired, two-sided t -test). Boxplot whiskers show minima and maxima;  centres indicate medians; and box boundaries indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'c, The increased response to Fsk in CNR1-expressing cells treated  with Rimonabant (SR) is consistent with the superactivation of adenylyl cyclase, as found in cell lines stably expressing G i-coupled receptors such as  CNR1. d, Total cAMP response induced by Fsk in CNR1-expressing cells. The  response is decreased in CNR1-expressing cells compared with non-expressing cells. Pretreatment with 10M Rimonabant reversed the CNR1-dependent  decrease. e, The endpoint cAMP response (R Endpoint ), expressed as fold change  over baseline cAMP (RBaseline ), induced by Fsk in CNR1-expressing cells is  significantly decreased in CNR1-expressing cells compared with non- expressing cells. Pretreatment with 10 M Rimonabant reverses the CNR1-dependent decrease (CNR1 Rimonabant, n=24 cells; +CNR1 Rimonabant,  n=19 cells; CNR1 +Rimonabant, n=27 cells; +CNR1 +Rimonabant, n=17 cells,  from 3 independent experiments). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'f , Pretreatment with 5M of the neutral  antagonist AM4113 significantly increased the Fsk-stimulated total cAMP levels  in CNR1-expressing relative to non-expressing cells. g , Pretreatment with  AM4113 significantly increased the Fsk-stimulated endpoint cAMP levels in CNR1-expressing cells relative to non-expressing cells (CNR1 AM4113, n=55 cells; +CNR1 AM4113, n=50 cells; CNR1 +AM4113, n=44 cells; +CNR1  +AM4113, n=48 cells, from 3 independent experiments). In d g, P-values were  obtained by one-way ANOVA with Sidaks multiple comparisons tests; boxplot  whiskers show 10th and 90th percentiles; centre lines indicate medians; box bounds indicate the 25th and 75th percentile; + indicates means. h , Expression  ratios of SNAP-tagged CNR1 isoforms to the Flag-tagged reference isoform are not significantly different across the combinatorial expression conditions (one-way ANOVA with Dunnetts multiple comparisons test). In all cases,  boxplot whiskers show 10th and 90th percentiles; centre lines indicate  medians; box bounds indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles; + indicates mean. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Individual data points are overlaid on the boxplot. i, The total cAMP response,  normalized to cells expressing the reference isoform, is increased in cells coexpressing the reference isoform and non-reference isoform 2 compared with control cells (ref+ref (ref), n=23 cells; ref+iso1, n=18 cells; ref+iso2,  n=27 cells from 3 independent experiments; one-way ANOVA with Dunnetts multiple comparisons test). j , Endpoint cAMP levels are significantly decreased  in cells coexpressing the reference isoform and non-reference isoform 1 compared with cells expressing only the reference isoform (one-way ANOVA  with Dunnetts multiple comparisons test). For box plots in i , j, whiskers show  10th and 90th percentiles; centre lines indicate medians; box bounds indicate  25th and 75th percentiles; + indicates mean. Individual data points are overlaid on the boxplot. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'k , Heatmap representation of cAMP levels after treatment with  Fsk and Rimonabant over time in individual HEK293 cells expressing a Flag-tagged reference isoform and different SNAP-tagged isoforms. CFP/FRET ratios were normalized using the baseline ratio as 0 and the maximum ratio  after Fsk, but before Rimonabant, treatment as 1. l , Alignment of the C-terminal  segment of the reference and non-reference GIPR isoforms. Varying regions in  isoform 1 are highlighted in blue. m , Concentrationresponse curves for cAMP  accumulation, intracellular calcium ((Ca 2+)i) mobilization and -arrestin-1/2  recruitment in response to GIP(142) stimulation, in HEK293T cells expressing GIPRNluc reference alone (dark grey, n=4 independent experiments performed in duplicate), GIPRNluc isoform 1 alone (pink, n=4 independent  experiments performed in duplicate) or GIPRNluc reference and GIPRNluc  isoform 1 combined (magenta, n=4 independent experiments performed in duplicate). Data normalized to GIPRNluc reference alone and expressed as means.e.m. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'n, Cell-surface expression of NlucGIPR reference ( n=7  independent experiments performed in duplicate) or NlucGIPR isoform 1 (n=7 independent experiments performed in duplicate). Data normalized to  NlucGIPR reference, with significance determined by MannWhitney test.   o, Left part of graph, cell-surface expression of NlucGIPR reference alone  (dark grey, n=4 independent experiments performed in duplicate) versus  NlucGIPR reference and NlucGIPR isoform 1 combined (magenta, n=4 independent experiments performed in duplicate). Middle, cell-surface expression of FlagGIPR reference in the absence (dark grey, n=5 independent experiments performed in duplicate) versus presence (light grey, n=4 independent experiments performed in duplicate) of NlucGIPR isoform 1.  Right, cell-surface expression of NlucGIPR isoform 1 in the absence (pink, n=5  independent experiments performed in duplicate) versus presence (light pink, n=5 independent experiments performed in duplicate) of FlagGIPR reference. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 18, 'content': 'Data normalized to NlucGIPR reference alone (left), FlagGIPR reference alone (middle), or NlucGIPR isoform 1 alone (right). Significance in n, o was determined by a two-tailed MannWhitney test. Box plots in n , o show  the maximum and minimum (whiskers), as well as medians, 25th and 75th  percentiles and means (+). p, GIP(142)-stimulated -arrestin-1 and -arrestin-2  recruitment to GIPRNluc reference in the absence (dark grey) or presence  (light grey) of NlucGIPR isoform 1, or to GIPRNluc isoform 1 in the absence (pink) or presence (light pink) of NlucGIPR reference. Data are meanss.e.m. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 19, 'content': 'Article 111 GPCR targets of 474 approved drugsnumber of receptor s AA2ARDRD2, 5HT7R ADRA1A number of tissue expression signaturesPE2R3FDA number of tissue expression signatures  number of approved drug s AA2ARHTR7DRD2 ADA1A PE2R3ACM1 5HT2A OPRMADRB2a b dopportunities for isoform-level drug selectivity  differential ligand binding  interfaces 50 receptor s 75 isoformsstructural criteri a1 40 receptors 62 isoformstissue  distribution  of interest tissues  potential fo r reduced on-target side ef fects non-refanti-target target refnon-re frefpotential fo r targeting of specific tissue s expression criteri a2GPR35 pEC50 Emaxe f 26 SNPs associated with clinical phenotypes   in non-reference isoforms of 5 GPCRsc Pamoic Acid Excipient Zaprinast Tool agonist BRET  Ratio (% ref max)BRET  Ratio (% ref max) BRET  Ratio (% ref max)BRET  Ratio (% ref max)Log [Pamoic Acid] M Log [Pamoic Acid] M Log [Zaprinast] M Log [Zaprinast] MgGeneAtlas reference isoform 1 Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 19, 'content': '6 | See next page for caption.', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 6 | Receptor isoforms and drug targets. a, Number of  receptors categorized by the number of tissue-expression signatures for all  GPCRs (grey) and for those belonging to the 111 targets of 474 FDA-approved drugs (in green). b , The number of approved drugs varies greatly for receptors  with the same number of tissue-expression signatures. Count plot of the 111 GPCRs that are targeted by 474 FDA-approved drugs. The radius of each circle indicates the number of GPCR targets for each combination of number of tissue-expression signatures ( x-axis) versus number of approved drugs   (y-axis). c, Disease-related phenotypes that can be exclusively linked to non- reference receptor isoforms were extracted from Gene ATLAS (seeMethods and Supplementary Table3). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 20, 'content': 'Non-reference isoform sequences for the  N-terminal segment of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 and C-terminal  segment of the metabotropic glutamate receptor 8 (GRM8) are represented in blue; the reference isoform is in grey. Polymorphisms are indicated in bold, together with their associated phenotypes in light grey boxes. d , Filtering based on structural and expression considerations identifies non-reference isoforms with changes in extracellular structure and tissue distribution with respect to the reference isoform, potentially allowing the development of ligands that specifically target them. e , Alignment of the N-terminal segment of  the reference and non-reference GPR35 isoforms. Varying regions in isoform 1 are highlighted in blue. f , pEC 50 and Emax values for the coupling of G13 and  -arrestin-2 to the reference GPR35 isoform and isoform 1 in response to lodoxamide, pamoic acid and zaprinast. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 20, 'content': '( n=3 biologically independent  samples; error values correspond to s.e.m.) g , BRET signals were monitored  after treatment of HEK293T cells with varying concentrations of pamoic acid and zaprinast using a GPR35G 13 SPASM sensor (left panel; n=3 biologically  independent samples) or eYFP-tagged GPR35 isoforms and -arrestin-2 tagged with nanoluciferase (right panel; n=3 biologically independent samples; Methods). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Article Extended Data Fig. 7 | GPCRdb receptor-isoform browser. Screenshot of the  isoform browser as implemented in GPCRdb. The classification tree (left) depicts the number of unique isoforms for each receptor, receptor family and GPCR class. In the structural annotation table (right), conserved, partially  conserved and non-conserved structural segments are coloured in green,  orange and red. Purple triangles indicate insertions. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 21, 'content': 'Each entry includes the receptor name, isoform number (assigned according to sequence length, with the longest non-reference isoform considered to be isoform 1), topological preservation or truncation status, the number of tissues in which it has been found to be expressed, an average value of segment completeness with respect to the reference receptor sequence (Ref(%)), its functional annotation (either inferred through structural fingerprint identity with other characterized  isoforms, or derived from the literature for isoforms with an associated  PubMed reference), and a link to its isoform-level proteomics evidence in ProteomicsDB.', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 22, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 23, 'content': 'ArticleExtended Data Fig. 8 | Analysis of MS-based proteomics data for receptor  isoforms.  a, Analysis pipeline for investigating proteomics data to detect  GPCR isoforms that had been identified using transcriptomics data at an isoform level. All transcripts from GPCRs with two or more isoforms that were  detected in brain tissue through our GTEx analysis were filtered to identify  those with unique peptide sequences. These transcripts were then matched with brain proteomics hits to discover how many receptor isoforms with unique protein sequences detected by transcriptomics could be identified by proteomics. b, Analysis of the number of matching peptides found in all  receptor isoforms, considering receptor segments. Non-reference isoforms are highlighted in blue shaded boxes. Consistent with previous studies, non-transmembrane receptor regions are the ones that are often detected by MS. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 23, 'content': ' c, Proteomic detection of isoforms using MS data from a study of 29 healthy  human tissues and 50 MS runs (seeMethods). Searching for GPCRs detected in GTEx in this data set identified a number of receptors with more than one  isoform. Of these, we filtered isoforms that had peptides matching one isoform  only. d, Analysis of the number of matching peptides found in all receptor  isoforms in c , considering receptor segments. Non-reference isoforms are  highlighted in violet. As seen in b , non-transmembrane receptor regions are  the ones that are more often detected by MS. Isoforms with an asterisk are found in both data sets. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 24, 'content': 'Extended Data Fig. 9 | Receptor-centric isoform distribution in cell lines  and single cells.  a, Analysis pipeline combining isoform-level data extracted  from transcriptomics experiments of 11 human cell lines deposited in BioProject, with GPCRdb, Ensembl and Uniprot annotations to filter for highly  expressed, protein-coding isoforms. Isoforms with truncated signal peptides  or those without at least one conserved transmembrane helix as compared with their GPCRdb reference are not considered (seeMethods). b , Relationship  between the number of GPCRs expressed in the 11 different cell lines (left axis, grey line) and the mean number of isoforms per receptor found in each tissue (right axis; means are shown as black dots and standard errors are grey lines).  c, Relationship between the total number of isoforms per receptor and its number of cell-line expression signatures in the analysed cell lines. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 24, 'content': 'The dark grey regression line was obtained using a linear model; the light grey confidence interval represents the standard error. d , Mean number of isoforms  per receptor expressed in single pancreatic cells as measured by single-cell  RNA-seq, with each point representing the mean number of isoforms per  receptor in a single cell whose transcriptome was sequenced. This analysis shows that, for every inferred cell type, there are several cells that express more than one isoform per receptor. See underlying data for ad in Supplementary  Table6. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 25, 'content': 'Article Extended Data Fig. 10 | Integration of several data sets provides an  isoform-centric view of GPCR signalling. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 26, 'content': '1 nature research  |  reporting summary October 2018 Corresponding author(s):M Madan Babu  Maria  Marti-Solano Last updated by author(s): 18/09/2020 Reporting Summary Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency  and transparency  in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see Authors & Referees  and the Editorial Policy Checklist . Statistics For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Me thods section. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 26, 'content': 'n/a Confirmed The exact sample size ( n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided  Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section. A description of all covariates tested A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regress ion coefficient)  AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals) For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted  Give P values as exact values whenever suitable. For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 26, 'content': "Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated Our web collection on statistics for biologists  contains articles on many of the points above. Software and code Policy information about availability of computer code Data collection All packages and customized R scripts used for data collection are described in the Methods.  Data analysis We used RStudio version 1.1.419 and jsonlite, the ggplot package, UpSetR, ggalluvial and snakeplotter packages for data analysi s and  visualisation. All illustrations were made using Adobe Illustrator CC 22.0.1. Pharmacological data were analysed using GraphPad  Prism  7.0c and ImageJ 2.0.0-rc-65/1.52a. Multiple sequence alignments were obtained using MUSCLE 3.8.31.  For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published lit erature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers.  We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research  guidelines for submitting code & software  for further information. ", 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 26, 'content': 'Data Policy information about availability of data All manuscripts must include a data availability statement . This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:  - Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets  - A list of figures that have associated raw data - A description of any restrictions on data availability All data accessed from public repositories like the GTEx database (www.gtexportal.org, v7), GPCRdb (gpcrdb.org), Ensembl (www.e nsembl.org, GRCh37 assembly),  Uniprot (www.uniprot.org), PDB (www.rcsb.org), PRIDE (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride, accession numbers PXD0079985 and PXD010154), Proteom icsDB  (www.proteomicsdb.org), Guide to Pharmacology (www.guidetopharmacology.org), GeneAtlas (geneatlas.roslin.ed.ac.uk) and BioProje ct (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ bioproject, accession numbers PRJNA183192 and PRJNA322355) is detailed in the Methods. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 26, 'content': 'All other data is available through Supp lementary Tables of the  manuscript and via the GPCRdb ressource developed in this work (gpcrdb.org/protein/isoforms).', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 27, 'content': '2 nature research  |  reporting summary October 2018Field-specific reporting Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before m aking your selection. Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf Life sciences study design All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative. Sample size Sample size for single-cell assays using FRET based sensors is limited by the temporal sampling frequency required to detect ch anges in  cellular second messengers. The frequency of imaging dictates how many cells or fields the microscope can physically move to an d capture  between imaging timepoints. 30 seconds is a common sampling frequency used to measure cAMP dynamics and is what we have used he re. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 27, 'content': ' Sample sizes using these assays range from 7 to >15 cells, as reported in relevant publications (Shiwarski, et al. 2017, PMID: 28264976;  Godbole, et al. 2017, PMID: 28874659; DiPilato, et al. 2004, PMID: 15545605). Data exclusions No data were excluded. Replication All experiments were done using biological replicates a minimum of 3 times with reported results consistent across replicates u nder  standardised conditions described in the methods. All attempts at replication were successful. Randomization Experimental conditions were randomized during data collection. Blinding Blinding was not possible because of experimental conditions that required intervention. Reference or non-reference isoforms ne eded to be  transfected into cells already expressing the reference isoform, and one sample of each condition needed to be imaged all on th e same day.  This requires keeping track of the identity of each sample in preparation for imaging and during imaging. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 27, 'content': 'Additionally, during image analysis,  analyzed cells were categorized based on their expression of only a single isoform or both isoforms based on expression of labe led receptors.  Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here,  indicate whether each material,  system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the approp riate section before selecting a response. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 27, 'content': ' Materials & experimental systems n/a Involved in the study Antibodies Eukaryotic cell lines Palaeontology Animals and other organisms Human research participants Clinical dataMethods n/a Involved in the study ChIP-seq Flow cytometry MRI-based neuroimaging Antibodies Antibodies used Monoclonal Anti-Flag M1 antibody (Sigma F-3040) was conjugated to Alexa 568 (Molecular Probes A20184)  Rat APC-conjugated anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody was purchased from Biolegend (637308) Goat APC-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG polyclonal antibody was purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (31984) Rabbit anti-Nluc polyclonal antibody was donated by Promega (not currently available in the catalogue)  Validation Monoclonal Anti-Flag M1 antibody is a widely used and well-documented antibody and appears in several publications each year (see https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sigma/f3040?lang=en&region=GB&gclid=Cj0KCQjw-uH6BRDQARIsAI3I-Ue4SSiRIQaYKmIA02trARI-5gYg-Cfp_ZsbLLEuXJKphHGeo0tqF8IaAtR0EALw_wcB). Monoclonal Anti-Flag M1 antibody was validated by Millipore Sigma for purity by western blot analysis for expected heavy and light chain bands. Additionally, M1 antibody was validated for sensitivity by detection of 1ng Flag fusion protein by blot, and  for  specificity through detection by blot of a single band in lysates from E. coli expressing the Flag epitope. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 27, 'content': ' Rat APC-conjugated anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody is a widely used and well-documented antibody, validated extensively by the manufacturer for use in FC and ICFC, and is used in several publications each year (see https://www.biolegend.com/en-us/products/apc-anti-dykddddk-tag-antibody-8099). ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
{'title': 'Combinatorial expression of GPCR isoforms affects signalling and drug responses', 'page': 28, 'content': '3 nature research  |  reporting summary October 2018producttype=antibody&productsubtype=antibody_secondary&productId=31984&version=122).   Rabbit anti-Nluc polyclonal antibody has been validated by the manufacturer.  Eukaryotic cell lines Policy information about cell lines Cell line source(s) HEK-293 cells were purchased from ATCC (CRL-1573)  HEK-293T cells were purchased from ATCC (CRL-3216) Authentication Cells were authenticated by ATCC through morphological analysis and karyotyping.  Mycoplasma contamination These cell lines were not specifically tested for mycoplasma contamination, but routine Hoechst staining shows no evidence of contamination. Commonly misidentified lines (See ICLAC  register)The cell lines used were HEK-293 or HEK-293T, not HEK. ', 'type': 'pagechunk'}
